Great Stories for Children

By the Same Author
Angry River
A Little Night Music
A Long Walk for Bina
Hanuman to the Rescue
Ghost Stories from the Raj
Strange Men, Strange Places
The India I Love
Tales and Legends from India
The Blue Umbrella
Ruskin Bond's Children's Omnibus
Romi and the Wildfire
When the Tiger was King
School Days
School Times
Funny Side Up
Roads to Mussoorie
All Roads Lead to Ganga
The Rupa Book of Great Animal Stories
The Rupa Book of True Tales of Mystery and Adventure
The Rupa Book of Ruskin Bond's Himalayan Tales
The Rupa Book of Great Suspense Stories
The Rupa Laughter Omnibus
The Rupa Book of Haunted Houses
The Rupa Book of Travellers' Tales
The Rupa Book of Great Crime Stories
The Rupa Book of Nightmare Tales
The Rupa Book of Shikar Stories
The Rupa Book of Love Stories
The Rupa Book of Wicked Stories
The Rupa Book of Heartwarming Stories
The Rupa Book of Thrills and Spills
The Rupa Carnival of Terror
The Rupa Book of Snappy Surprises
Shudders in the Dark
Stories Short and Sweet

First published in 2011 by
Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd.
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj
New Delhi 110002
Sales centres:
Allahabad Bengaluru Chennai
Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu
Kolkata Mumbai
Selection Copyright © Ruskin Bond 2011
Cover design: kathanstudio@gmail.com
This digital edition published in 2012
Ruskin Bond asserts the moral right to be identified as the author of this work.
e-ISBN: 978-81-291-2321-3
All rights reserved.
This e-book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or
otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated, without the publisher’s
prior consent, in any form or cover other than that in which it is published. No part of
this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic, mechanical, print reproduction, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher. Any unauthorized distribution
of this e-book may be considered a direct infringement of copyright and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Contents
A Special Tree
The School Among the Pines
The Wind on Haunted Hill
Romi and the Wildfire
Tiger My Friend
Monkey Trouble
Snake Trouble
Those Three Bears
The Coral Tree
The Thief's Story
When the Trees Walked
Goodbye, Miss Mackenzie
Pret in the House
The Overcoat
The Tunnel
Wild Fruit
The Night the Roof Blew Off

A Traveller's Tale
And Now We are Twelve

A Special Tree
ne day, when Rakesh was six, he walked home from the Mussoorie bazaar eating
cherries. They were a little sweet, a little sour; small, bright red cherries, which
had come all the way from the Kashmir Valley.
Here in the Himalayan foothills where Rakesh lived, there were not many fruit trees.
The soil was stony, and the dry cold winds stunted the growth of most plants. But on the
more sheltered slopes there were forests of oak and deodar.
Rakesh lived with his grandfather on the outskirts of Mussoorie, just where the
forest began. His father and mother lived in a small village fifty miles away, where they
grew maize and rice and barley in narrow terraced fields on the lower slopes of the
mountain. But there were no schools in the village, and Rakesh’s parents were keen that
he should go to school. As soon as he was of school-going age, they sent him to stay
with his grandfather in Mussoorie.
He had a little cottage outside the town.
Rakesh was on his way home from school when he bought the cherries. He paid fifty
paise for the bunch. It took him about half-an-hour to walk home, and by the time he
reached the cottage there were only three cherries left.
‘Have a cherry, Grandfather,’ he said, as soon as he saw his grandfather in the
garden.
Grandfather took one cherry and Rakesh promptly ate the other two. He kept the last
seed in his mouth for some time, rolling it round and round on his tongue until all the
tang had gone. Then he placed the seed on the palm of his hand and studied it.
‘Are cherry seeds lucky?’ asked Rakesh.
‘Of course.’
‘Then I’ll keep it.’
‘Nothing is lucky if you put it away. If you want luck, you must put it to some use.’
‘What can I do with a seed?’
‘Plant it.’
So Rakesh found a small space and began to dig up a flowerbed.
‘Hey, not there,’ said Grandfather, ‘I’ve sown mustard in that bed. Plant it in that
shady corner, where it won’t be disturbed.’
Rakesh went to a corner of the garden where the earth was soft and yielding. He did
not have to dig. He pressed the seed into the soil with his thumb and it went right in.
Then he had his lunch, and ran off to play cricket with his friends, and forgot all
about the cherry seed.
When it was winter in the hills, a cold wind blew down from the snows and went

whoo-whoo-whoo in the deodar trees, and the garden was dry and bare. In the evenings
Grandfather and Rakesh sat over a charcoal fire, and Grandfather told Rakesh stories –
stories about people who turned into animals, and ghosts who lived in trees, and beans
that jumped and stones that wept – and in turn Rakesh would read to him from the
newspaper, Grandfather’s eyesight being rather weak. Rakesh found the newspaper
very dull – especially after the stories – but Grandfather wanted all the news…
They knew it was spring when the wild duck flew north again, to Siberia. Early in
the morning, when he got up to chop wood and light a fire, Rakesh saw the V–shaped
formation streaming northward, the calls of the birds carrying clearly through the thin
mountain air.
One morning in the garden he bent to pick up what he thought was a small twig and
found to his surprise that it was well rooted. He stared at it for a moment, then ran to
fetch Grandfather, calling, ‘Dada, come and look, the cherry tree has come up!’
‘What cherry tree?’ asked Grandfather, who had forgotten about it. ‘The seed we
planted last year – look, it’s come up!’
Rakesh went down on his haunches, while Grandfather bent almost double and
peered down at the tiny tree. It was about four inches high.
‘Yes, it’s a cherry tree,’ said Grandfather. ‘You should water it now and then.’
Rakesh ran indoors and came back with a bucket of water.
‘Don’t drown it!’ said Grandfather.
Rakesh gave it a sprinkling and circled it with pebbles.
‘What are the pebbles for?’ asked Grandfather.
‘For privacy,’ said Rakesh.
He looked at the tree every morning but it did not seem to be growing very fast, so
he stopped looking at it except quickly, out of the corner of his eye. And, after a week
or two, when he allowed himself to look at it properly, he found that it had grown – at
least an inch!
That year the monsoon rains came early and Rakesh plodded to and from school in
raincoat and chappals. Ferns sprang from the trunks of trees, strange-looking lilies
came up in the long grass, and even when it wasn’t raining the trees dripped and mist
came curling up the valley. The cherry tree grew quickly in this season.
It was about two feet high when a goat entered the garden and ate all the leaves.
Only the main stem and two thin branches remained.
‘Never mind,’ said Grandfather, seeing that Rakesh was upset. ‘It will grow again,
cherry trees are tough.’
Towards the end of the rainy season new leaves appeared on the tree. Then a woman
cutting grass scrambled down the hillside, her scythe swishing through the heavy
monsoon foliage. She did not try to avoid the tree: one sweep, and the cherry tree was
cut in two.
When Grandfather saw what had happened, he went after the woman and scolded

her; but the damage could not be repaired.
‘Maybe it will die now,’ said Rakesh.
‘Maybe,’ said Grandfather.
But the cherry tree had no intention of dying.
By the time summer came round again, it had sent out several new shoots with tender
green leaves. Rakesh had grown taller too. He was eight now, a sturdy boy with curly
black hair and deep black eyes. ‘Blackberry eyes,’ Grandfather called them.
That monsoon Rakesh went home to his village, to help his father and mother with
the planting and ploughing and sowing. He was thinner but stronger when he came back
to Grandfather’s house at the end of the rains to find that the cherry tree had grown
another foot. It was now up to his chest.
Even when there was rain, Rakesh would sometimes water the tree. He wanted it to
know that he was there.
One day he found a bright green praying-mantis perched on a branch, peering at him
with bulging eyes. Rakesh let it remain there; it was the cherry tree’s first visitor.
The next visitor was a hairy caterpillar, who started making a meal of the leaves.
Rakesh removed it quickly and dropped it on a heap of dry leaves.
Come back when you’re a butterfly,’ he said.
Winter came early. The cherry tree bent low with the weight of snow. Field-mice
sought shelter in the roof of the cottage. The road from the valley was blocked, and for
several days there was no newspaper, and this made Grandfather quite grumpy. His
stories began to have unhappy endings.
In February it was Rakesh’s birthday. He was nine – and the tree was four, but
almost as tall as Rakesh.
One morning, when the sun came out, Grandfather came into the garden to ‘let some
warmth get into my bones,’ as he put it. He stopped in front of the cherry tree, stared at
it for a few moments, and then called out, ‘Rakesh! Come and look! Come quickly
before it falls!’
Rakesh and Grandfather gazed at the tree as though it had performed a miracle.
There was a pale pink blossom at the end of a branch.
The following year there were more blossoms. And suddenly the tree was taller than
Rakesh, even though it was less than half his age. And then it was taller than
Grandfather, who was older than some of the oak trees.
But Rakesh had grown too. He could run and jump and climb trees as well as most
boys, and he read a lot of books, although he still liked listening to Grandfather’s tales.
In the cherry tree, bees came to feed on the nectar in the blossoms, and tiny birds
pecked at the blossoms and broke them off. But the tree kept blossoming right through
the spring, and there were always more blossoms than birds.
That summer there were small cherries on the tree. Rakesh tasted one and spat it out.
‘It’s too sour,’ he said.

‘They’ll be better next year,’ said Grandfather.
But the birds liked them – especially the bigger birds, such as the bulbuls and scarlet
minivets – and they flitted in and out of the foliage, feasting on the cherries.
On a warm sunny afternoon, when even the bees looked sleepy, Rakesh was looking
for Grandfather without finding him in any of his favourite places around the house.
Then he looked out of the bedroom window and saw Grandfather reclining on a cane
chair under the cherry tree.
‘There’s just the right amount of shade here,’ said Grandfather. ‘And I like looking at
the leaves.’
‘They’re pretty leaves,’ said Rakesh. ‘And they are always ready to dance, if there’s
a breeze.’
After Grandfather had come indoors, Rakesh went into the garden and lay down on
the grass beneath the tree. He gazed up through the leaves at the great blue sky; and
turning on his side, he could see the mountains striding away into the clouds. He was
still lying beneath the tree when the evening shadows crept across the garden.
Grandfather came back and sat down beside Rakesh, and they waited in silence until
the stars came out and the nightjar began to call. In the forest below, the crickets and
cicadas began tuning up; and suddenly the trees were full of the sound of insects.
‘There are so many trees in the forest,’ said Rakesh. ‘What’s so special about this
tree? Why do we like it so much?’
‘We planted it ourselves,’ said Grandfather. That’s why it’s special.’
‘Just one small seed,’ said Rakesh, and he touched the smooth bark of the tree that he
had grown. He ran his hand along the trunk of the tree and put his finger to the tip of a
leaf. ‘I wonder,’ he whispered. ‘Is this what it feels to be God?’

The School Among the Pines
1

leopard, lithe and sinewy, drank at the mountain stream, and then lay down on the
grass to bask in the lat36February sunshine. Its tail twitched occasionally and the
animal appeared to be sleeping. At the sound of distant voices it raised its head to
listen, then stood up and leapt lightly over the boulders in the stream, disappearing
among the trees on the opposite bank.
A minute or two later, three children came walking down the forest path. They were
a girl and two boys, and they were singing in their local dialect an old song they had
learnt from their grandparents.
Five more miles to go!
We climb through rain and snow.
A river to cross…
A mountain to pass…
Now we’ve four more miles to go!
Their school satchels looked new, their clothes had been washed and pressed. Their
loud and cheerful singing startled a Spotted Forktail. The bird left its favourite rock in
the stream and flew down the dark ravine.
‘Well, we have only three more miles to go,’ said the bigger boy, Prakash, who had
been this way hundreds of times. ‘But first we have to cross the stream.’
He was a sturdy twelve-year-old with eyes like raspberries and a mop of bushy hair
that refused to settle down on his head. The girl and her small brother were taking this
path for the first time.
‘I’m feeling tired, Bina,’ said the little boy.
Bina smiled at him, and Prakash said, ‘Don’t worry, Sonu, you’ll get used to the
walk. There’s plenty of time.’ He glanced at the old watch he’d been given by his
grandfather. It needed constant winding. ‘We can rest here for five or six minutes.’
They sat down on a smooth boulder and watched the clear water of the shallow
stream tumbling downhill. Bina examined the old watch on Prakash’s wrist. The glass
was badly scratched and she could barely make out the figures on the dial. ‘Are you
sure it still gives the right time?’ she asked.
‘Well, it loses five minutes every day, so I put it ten minutes forward at night. That
means by morning it’s quite accurate! Even our teacher, Mr Mani, asks me for the time.

If he doesn’t ask, I tell him! The clock in our classroom keeps stopping.’
They removed their shoes and let the cold mountain water run over their feet. Bina
was the same age as Prakash. She had pink cheeks, soft brown eyes, and hair that was
just beginning to lose its natural curls. Hers was a gentle face, but a determined little
chin showed that she could be a strong person. Sonu, her younger brother, was ten. He
was a thin boy who had been sickly as a child but was now beginning to fill out.
Although he did not look very athletic, he could run like the wind.
Bina had been going to school in her own village of Koli, on the other side of the
mountain. But it had been a Primary School, finishing at Class Five. Now, in order to
study in the Sixth, she would have to walk several miles every day to Nauti, where
there was a High School going up to the Eighth. It had been decided that Sonu would
also shift to the new school, to give Bina company. Prakash, their neighbour in Koli,
was already a pupil at the Nauti school. His mischievous nature, which sometimes got
him into trouble, had resulted in his having to repeat a year.
But this didn’t seem to bother him. ‘What’s the hurry?’ he had told his indignant
parents. ‘You’re not sending me to a foreign land when I finish school. And our cows
aren’t running away, are they?’
‘You would prefer to look after the cows, wouldn’t you?’ asked Bina, as they got up
to continue their walk.
‘Oh, school’s all right. Wait till you see old Mr Mani. He always gets our names
mixed up, as well as the subjects he’s supposed to be teaching. At out last lesson,
instead of maths, he gave us a geography lesson!’
‘More fun than maths,’ said Bina.
‘Yes, but there’s a new teacher this year. She’s very young, they say, just out of
college. I wonder what she’ll be like.’
Bina walked faster and Sonu had some trouble keeping up with them. She was
excited about the new school and the prospect of different surroundings. She had
seldom been outside her own village, with its small school and single ration shop. The
day’s routine never varied – helping her mother in the fields or with household tasks
like fetching water from the spring or cutting grass and fodder for the cattle. Her father,
who was a soldier, was away for nine months in the year and Sonu was still too small
for the heavier tasks.
As they neared Nauti village, they were joined by other children coming from
different directions. Even where there were no major roads, the mountains were full of
little lanes and short cuts. Like a game of snakes and ladders, these narrow paths
zigzagged around the hills and villages, cutting through fields and crossing narrow
ravines until they came together to form a fairly busy road along which mules, cattle
and goats joined the throng.
Nauti was a fairly large village, and from here a broader but dustier road started for

Tehri. There was a small bus, several trucks and (for part of the way) a road-roller.
The road hadn’t been completed because the heavy diesel roller couldn’t take the steep
climb to Nauti. It stood on the roadside half way up the road from Tehri.
Prakash knew almost everyone in the area, and exchanged greetings and gossip with
other children as well as with muleteers, bus-drivers, milkmen and labourers working
on the road. He loved telling everyone the time, even if they weren’t interested.
‘It’s nine o’clock,’ he would announce, glancing at his wrist. ‘Isn’t your bus leaving
today?’
‘Off with you!’ the bus-driver would respond, ‘I’ll leave when I’m ready.’
As the children approached Nauti, the small flat school buildings came into view on
the outskirts of the village, fringed with a line of long-leaved pines. A small crowd had
assembled on the playing field. Something unusual seemed to have happened. Prakash
ran forward to see what it was all about. Bina and Sonu stood aside, waiting in a patch
of sunlight near the boundary wall.
Prakash soon came running back to them. He was bubbling over with excitement.
‘It’s Mr Mani!’ he gasped. ‘He’s disappeared! People are saying a leopard must
have carried him off!’
2
Mr Mani wasn’t really old. He was about fifty-five and was expected to retire soon.
But for the children, adults over forty seemed ancient! And Mr Mani had always been a
bit absent-minded, even as a young man.
He had gone out for his early morning walk, saying he’d be back by eight o’clock, in
time to have his breakfast and be ready for class. He wasn’t married, but his sister and
her husband stayed with him. When it was past nine o’clock his sister presumed he’d
stopped at a neighbour’s house for breakfast (he loved tucking into other people’s
breakfast) and that he had gone on to school from there. But when the school bell rang
at ten o’clock, and everyone but Mr Mani was present, questions were asked and
guesses were made.
No one had seen him return from his walk and enquiries made in the village showed
that he had not stopped at anyone’s house. For Mr Mani to disappear was puzzling; for
him to disappear without his breakfast was extraordinary.
Then a milkman returning from the next village said he had seen a leopard sitting on
a rock on the outskirts of the pine forest. There had been talk of a cattle-killer in the
valley, of leopards and other animals being displaced by the construction of a dam. But
as yet no one had heard of a leopard attacking a man. Could Mr Mani have been its first
victim? Someone found a strip of red cloth entangled in a blackberry bush and went
running through the village showing it to everyone. Mr Mani had been known to wear
red pyjamas. Surely, he had been seized and eaten! But where were his remains? And

why had he been in his pyjamas?
Meanwhile, Bina and Sonu and the rest of the children had followed their teachers
into the school playground. Feeling a little lost, Bina looked around for Prakash. She
found herself facing a dark slender young woman wearing spectacles, who must have
been in her early twenties – just a little too old to be another student. She had a kind
expressive face and she seemed a little concerned by all that had been happening.
Bina noticed that she had lovely hands; it was obvious that the new teacher hadn’t
milked cows or worked in the fields!
‘You must be new here,’ said the teacher, smiling at Bina. ‘And is this your little
brother?’
‘Yes, we’ve come from Koli village. We were at school there.’
‘It’s a long walk from Koli. You didn’t see any leopards, did you? Well, I’m new
too. Are you in the Sixth class?’
‘Sonu is in the Third. I’m in the Sixth.’
‘Then I’m your new teacher. My name is Tania Ramola. Come along, let’s see if we
can settle down in our classroom.’
Mr Mani turned up at twelve o’clock, wondering what all the fuss was about. No, he
snapped, he had not been attacked by a leopard; and yes, he had lost his pyjamas and
would someone kindly return them to him?
‘How did you lose your pyjamas, Sir?’ asked Prakash.
‘They were blown off the washing line!’ snapped Mr Mani.
After much questioning, Mr Mani admitted that he had gone further than he had
intended, and that he had lost his way coming back. He had been a bit upset because the
new teacher, a slip of a girl, had been given charge of the Sixth, while he was still with
the Fifth, along with that troublesome boy Prakash, who kept on reminding him of the
time! The headmaster had explained that as Mr Mani was due to retire at the end of the
year, the school did not wish to burden him with a senior class. But Mr Mani looked
upon the whole thing as a plot to get rid of him. He glowered at Miss Ramola whenever
he passed her. And when she smiled back at him, he looked the other way!
Mr Mani had been getting even more absent-minded of late – putting on his shoes
without his socks, wearing his homespun waistcoat inside out, mixing up people’s
names, and of course, eating other people’s lunches and dinners. His sister had made a
special mutton broth (pai) for the postmaster, who was down with ‘flu’ and had asked
Mr Mani to take it over in a thermos. When the postmaster opened the thermos, he found
only a few drops of broth at the bottom – Mr Mani had drunk the rest somewhere along
the way.
When sometimes Mr Mani spoke of his coming retirement, it was to describe his
plans for the small field he owned just behind the house. Right now, it was full of
potatoes, which did not require much looking after; but he had plans for growing

dahlias, roses, French beans, and other fruits and flowers.
The next time he visited Tehri, he promised himself, he would buy some dahlia
bulbs and rose cuttings. The monsoon season would be a good time to put them down.
And meanwhile, his potatoes were still flourishing.
3
Bina enjoyed her first day at the new school. She felt at ease with Miss Ramola, as did
most of the boys and girls in her class. Tania Ramola had been to distant towns such as
Delhi and Lucknow – places they had only read about – and it was said that she had a
brother who was a pilot and flew planes all over the world. Perhaps he’d fly over
Nauti some day!
Most of the children had, of course, seen planes flying overhead, but none of them
had seen a ship, and only a few had been in a train. Tehri mountain was far from the
railway and hundreds of miles from the sea. But they all knew about the big dam that
was being built at Tehri, just forty miles away.
Bina, Sonu and Prakash had company for part of the way home, but gradually the
other children went off in different directions. Once they had crossed the stream, they
were on their own again.
It was a steep climb all the way back to their village. Prakash had a supply of
peanuts which he shared with Bina and Sonu, and at a small spring they quenched their
thirst.
When they were less than a mile from home, they met a postman who had finished
his round of the villages in the area and was now returning to Nauti.
‘Don’t waste time along the way,’ he told them. ‘Try to get home before dark.’
‘What’s the hurry?’ asked Prakash, glancing at his watch. ‘It’s only five o’clock.’
‘There’s a leopard around. I saw it this morning, not far from the stream. No one is
sure how it got here. So don’t take any chances. Get home early.’
‘So there really is a leopard,’ said Sonu.
They took his advice and walked faster, and Sonu forgot to complain about his
aching feet.
They were home well before sunset.
There was a smell of cooking in the air and they were hungry.
‘Cabbage and roti,’ said Prakash gloomily. ‘But I could eat anything today.’ He
stopped outside his small slate-roofed house, and Bina and Sonu waved him goodbye,
then carried on across a couple of ploughed fields until they reached their small stone
house.
‘Stuffed tomatoes,’ said Sonu, sniffing just outside the front door.
‘And lemon pickle,’ said Bina, who had helped cut, sun and salt the lemons a month
previously.

Their mother was lighting the kitchen stove. They greeted her with great hugs and
demands for an immediate dinner. She was a good cook who could make even the
simplest of dishes taste delicious. Her favourite saying was, ‘Home-made pai is better
than chicken soup in Delhi,’ and Bina and Sonu had to agree.
Electricity had yet to reach their village, and they took their meal by the light of a
kerosene lamp. After the meal, Sonu settled down to do a little homework, while Bina
stepped outside to look at the stars.
Across the fields, someone was playing a flute. ‘It must be Prakash,’ thought Bina.
‘He always breaks off on the high notes.’ But the flute music was simple and appealing,
and she began singing softly to herself in the dark.
4
Mr Mani was having trouble with the porcupines. They had been getting into his garden
at night and digging up and eating his potatoes. From his bedroom window – left open,
now that the mild-April weather had arrived – he could listen to them enjoying the
vegetables he had worked hard to grow. Scrunch, scrunch! Katar, katar, as their sharp
teeth sliced through the largest and juiciest of potatoes. For Mr Mani it was as though
they were biting through his own flesh. And the sound of them digging industriously as
they rooted up those healthy, leafy plants, made him tremble with rage and indignation.
The unfairness of it all!
Yes, Mr Mani hated porcupines. He prayed for their destruction, their removal from
the face of the earth. But, as his friends were quick to point out, ‘Bhagwan protected
porcupines too,’ and in any case you could never see the creatures or catch them, they
were completely nocturnal.
Mr Mani got out of bed every night, torch in one hand, a stout stick in the other, but
as soon as he stepped into the garden the crunching and digging stopped and he was
greeted by the most infuriating of silences. He would grope around in the dark,
swinging wildly with the stick, but not a single porcupine was to be seen or heard. As
soon as he was back in bed – the sounds would start all over again. Scrunch, scrunch,
katar, katar…
Mr Mani came to his class tired and dishevelled, with rings beneath his eyes and a
permanent frown on his face. It took some time for his pupils to discover the reason for
his misery, but when they did, they felt sorry for their teacher and took to discussing
ways and means of saving his potatoes from the porcupines.
It was Prakash who came up with the idea of a moat or waterditch. ‘Porcupines
don’t like water,’ he said knowledgeably.
‘How do you know?’ asked one of his friends.
‘Throw water on one and see how it runs! They don’t like getting their quills wet.’
There was no one who could disprove Prakash’s theory, and the class fell in with

the idea of building a moat, especially as it meant getting most of the day off.
‘Anything to make Mr Mani happy,’ said the headmaster, and the rest of the school
watched with envy as the pupils of Class Five, armed with spades and shovels
collected from all parts of the village, took up their positions around Mr Mani’s potato
field and began digging a ditch.
By evening the moat was ready, but it was still dry and the porcupines got in again
that night and had a great feast.
‘At this rate,’ said Mr Mani gloomily ‘there won’t be any potatoes left to save.’
But next day Prakash and the other boys and girls managed to divert the water from a
stream that flowed past the village. They had the satisfaction of watching it flow gently
into the ditch. Everyone went home in a good mood. By nightfall, the ditch had
overflowed, the potato field was flooded, and Mr Mani found himself trapped inside
his house. But Prakash and his friends had won the day. The porcupines stayed away
that night!
A month had passed, and wild violets, daisies and buttercups now sprinkled the hill
slopes, and on her way to school Bina gathered enough to make a little posy. The bunch
of flowers fitted easily into an old ink-well. Miss Ramola was delighted to find this
little display in the middle of her desk.
‘Who put these here?’ she asked in surprise.
Bina kept quiet, and the rest of the class smiled secretively. After that, they took
turns bringing flowers for the classroom.
On her long walks to school and home again, Bina became aware that April was the
month of new leaves. The oak leaves were bright green above and silver beneath, and
when they rippled in the breeze they were like clouds of silvery green. The path was
strewn with old leaves, dry and crackly. Sonu loved kicking them around.
Clouds of white butterflies floated across the stream. Sonu was chasing a butterfly
when he stumbled over something dark and repulsive. He went sprawling on the grass.
When he got to his feet, he looked down at the remains of a small animal.
‘Bina! Prakash! Come quickly!’ he shouted.
It was part of a sheep, killed some days earlier by a much larger animal.
‘Only a leopard could have done this,’ said Prakash.
‘Let’s get away, then,’ said Sonu. ‘It might still be around!’
‘No, there’s nothing left to eat. The leopard will be hunting elsewhere by now.
Perhaps it’s moved on to the next valley.’
‘Still, I’m frightened,’ said Sonu. ‘There may be more leopards!’
Bina took him by the hand. ‘Leopards don’t attack humans!’ she said.
‘They will, if they get a taste for people!’ insisted Prakash.
‘Well, this one hasn’t attacked any people as yet,’ said Bina, although she couldn’t
be sure. Hadn’t there been rumours of a leopard attacking some workers near the dam?

But she did not want Sonu to feel afraid, so she did not mention the story. All she said
was, ‘It has probably come here because of all the activity near the dam.’
All the same, they hurried home. And for a few days, whenever they reached the
stream, they crossed over very quickly, unwilling to linger too long at that lovely spot.
5
A few days later, a school party was on its way to Tehri to see the new dam that was
being built.
Miss Ramola had arranged to take her class, and Mr Mani, not wishing to be left out,
insisted on taking his class as well. That meant there were about fifty boys and girls
taking part in the outing. The little bus could only take thirty. A friendly truck-driver
agreed to take some children if they were prepared to sit on sacks of potatoes. And
Prakash persuaded the owner of the diesel-roller to turn it round and head it back to
Tehri – with him and a couple of friends up on the driving seat.
Prakash’s small group set off at sunrise, as they had to walk some distance in order
to reach the stranded road-roller. The bus left at 9 a.m. with Miss Ramola and her
class, and Mr Mani and some of his pupils. The truck was to follow later.
It was Bina’s first visit to a large town and her first bus ride.
The sharp curves along the winding, downhill road made several children feel sick.
The bus-driver seemed to be in a tearing hurry. He took them along at rolling, rollicking
speed, which made Bina feel quite giddy. She rested her head on her arms and refused
to look out of the window. Hairpin bends and cliff edges, pine forests and snowcapped
peaks, all swept past her, but she felt too ill to want to look at anything. It was just as
well – those sudden drops, hundreds of feet to the valley below, were quite frightening.
Bina began to wish that she hadn’t come – or that she had joined Prakash on the roadroller instead!
Miss Ramola and Mr Mani didn’t seem to notice the lurching and groaning of the old
bus. They had made this journey many times. They were busy arguing about the
advantages and disadvantages of large dams – an argument that was to continue on and
off for much of the day; sometimes in Hindi, sometimes in English, sometimes in the
local dialect!
Meanwhile, Prakash and his friends had reached the roller. The driver hadn’t turned
up, but they managed to reverse it and get it going in the direction of Tehri. They were
soon overtaken by both the bus and the truck but kept moving along at a steady chug.
Prakash spotted Bina at the window of the bus and waved cheerfully. She responded
feebly.
Bina felt better when the road levelled out near Tehri. As they crossed an old bridge
over the wide river, they were startled by a loud bang which made the bus shudder. A
cloud of dust rose above the town.

‘They’re blasting the mountain,’ said Miss Ramola.
‘End of a mountain,’ said Mr Mani mournfully.
While they were drinking cups of tea at the bus stop, waiting for the potato truck and
the road-roller, Miss Ramola and Mr Mani continued their argument about the dam.
Miss Ramola maintained that it would bring electric power and water for irrigation to
large areas of the country, including the surrounding area. Mr Mani declared that it was
a menace, as it was situated in an earthquake zone. There would be a terrible disaster if
the dam burst! Bina found it all very confusing. And what about the animals in the area,
she wondered, what would happen to them?
The argument was becoming quite heated when the potato truck arrived. There was
no sign of the road-roller, so it was decided that Mr Mani should wait for Prakash and
his friends while Miss Ramola’s group went ahead.
Some eight or nine miles before Tehri the road-roller had broken down, and Prakash
and his friends were forced to walk. They had not gone far, however, when a mule train
came along – five or six mules that had been delivering sacks of grain in Nauti. A boy
rode on the first mule, but the others had no loads.
‘Can you give us a ride to Tehri?’ called Prakash.
‘Make yourselves comfortable,’ said the boy.
There were no saddles, only gunny sacks strapped on to the mules with rope. They
had a rough but jolly ride down to the Tehri bus stop. None of them had ever ridden
mules; but they had saved at least an hour on the road.
Looking around the bus stop for the rest of the party, they could find no one from
their school. And Mr Mani, who should have been waiting for them, had vanished.
6
Tania Ramola and her group had taken the steep road to the hill above Tehri. Half-anhour’s climbing brought them to a little plateau which overlooked the town, the river
and the dam-site.
The earthworks for the dam were only just coming up, but a wide tunnel had been
bored through the mountain to divert the river into another channel. Down below, the
old town was still spread out across the valley and from a distance it looked quite
charming and picturesque.
‘Will the whole town be swallowed up by the waters of the dam?’ asked Bina.
‘Yes, all of it,’ said Miss Ramola. ‘The clock tower and the old palace. The long
bazaar, and the temples, the schools and the jail, and hundreds of houses, for many
miles up the valley. All those people will have to go – thousands of them! Of course,
they’ll be resettled elsewhere.’
‘But the town’s been here for hundreds of years,’ said Bina. ‘They were quite happy
without the dam, weren’t they?’

‘I suppose they were. But the dam isn’t just for them – it’s for the millions who live
further downstream, across the plains.’
‘And it doesn’t matter what happens to this place?’
‘The local people will be given new homes, somewhere else.’ Miss Ramola found
herself on the defensive and decided to change the subject. ‘Everyone must be hungry.
It’s time we had our lunch.’
Bina kept quiet. She didn’t think the local people would want to go away. And it
was a good thing, she mused, that there was only a small stream and not a big river
running past her village. To be uprooted like this – a town and hundreds of villages –
and put down somewhere on the hot, dusty plains – seemed to her unbearable.
‘Well, I’m glad I don’t live in Tehri,’ she said.
She did not know it, but all the animals and most of the birds had already left the
area. The leopard had been among them.
They walked through the colourful, crowded bazaar, where fruit-sellers did business
beside silversmiths, and pavement vendors sold everything from umbrellas to glass
bangles. Sparrows attacked sacks of grain, monkeys made off with bananas, and stray
cows and dogs rummaged in refuse bins, but nobody took any notice. Music blared from
radios. Buses blew their horns. Sonu bought a whistle to add to the general din, but
Miss Ramola told him to put it away. Bina had kept ten rupees aside, and now she used
it to buy a cotton head-scarf for her mother.
As they were about to enter a small restaurant for a meal, they were joined by
Prakash and his companions; but of Mr Mani there was still no sign.
‘He must have met one of his relatives,’ said Prakash. ‘He has relatives
everywhere.’
After a simple meal of rice and lentils, they walked the length of the bazaar without
seeing Mr Mani. At last, when they were about to give up the search, they saw him
emerge from a by-lane, a large sack slung over his shoulder.
‘Sir, where have you been?’ asked Prakash. ‘We have been looking for you
everywhere.’
On Mr Mani’s face was a look of triumph.
‘Help me with this bag,’ he said breathlessly.
‘You’ve bought more potatoes, sir,’ said Prakash.
‘Not potatoes, boy. Dahlia bulbs!’
7
It was dark by the time they were all back in Nauti. Mr Mani had refused to be
separated from his sack of dahlia bulbs, and had been forced to sit in the back of the
truck with Prakash and most of the boys.

Bina did not feel so ill on the return journey. Going uphill was definitely better than
going downhill! But by the time the bus reached Nauti it was too late for most of the
children to walk back to the more distant villages. The boys were put up in different
homes, while the girls were given beds in the school verandah.
The night was warm and still. Large moths fluttered around the single bulb that lit
the verandah. Counting moths, Sonu soon fell asleep. But Bina stayed awake for some
time, listening to the sounds of the night. A nightjar went tonk-tonk in the bushes, and
somewhere in the forest an owl hooted softly. The sharp call of a barking-deer
travelled up the valley, from the direction of the stream. Jackals kept howling. It
seemed that there were more of them than ever before.
Bina was not the only one to hear the barking-deer. The leopard, stretched full length
on a rocky ledge, heard it too. The leopard raised its head and then got up slowly. The
deer was its natural prey. But there weren’t many left, and that was why the leopard,
robbed of its forest by the dam, had taken to attacking dogs and cattle near the villages.
As the cry of the barking-deer sounded nearer, the leopard left its look-out point and
moved swiftly through the shadows towards the stream.
8
In early June the hills were dry and dusty, and forest fires broke out, destroying shrubs
and trees, killing birds and small animals. The resin in the pines made these trees burn
more fiercely, and the wind would take sparks from the trees and carry them into the dry
grass and leaves, so that new fires would spring up before the old ones had died out.
Fortunately, Bina’s village was not in the pine belt; the fires did not reach it. But Nauti
was surrounded by a fire that raged for three days, and the children had to stay away
from school.
And then, towards the end of June, the monsoon rains arrived and there was an end
to forest fires. The monsoon lasts three months and the lower Himalayas would be
drenched in rain, mist and cloud for the next three months.
The first rain arrived while Bina, Prakash and Sonu were returning home from
school. Those first few drops on the dusty path made them cry out with excitement.
Then the rain grew heavier and a wonderful aroma rose from the earth.
‘The best smell in the world!’ exclaimed Bina.
Everything suddenly came to life. The grass, the crops, the trees, the birds. Even the
leaves of the trees glistened and looked new.
That first wet weekend, Bina and Sonu helped their mother plant beans, maize and
cucumbers. Sometimes, when the rain was very heavy, they had to run indoors.
Otherwise they worked in the rain, the soft mud clinging to their bare legs.
Prakash now owned a black dog with one ear up and one ear down. The dog ran
around getting in everyone’s way, barking at cows, goats, hens and humans, without

frightening any of them. Prakash said it was a very clever dog, but no one else seemed
to think so. Prakash also said it would protect the village from the leopard, but others
said the dog would be the first to be taken – he’d run straight into the jaws of Mr Spots!
In Nauti, Tania Ramola was trying to find a dry spot in the quarters she’d been
given. It was an old building and the roof was leaking in several places. Mugs and
buckets were scattered about the floor in order to catch the drip.
Mr Mani had dug up all his potatoes and presented them to the friends and
neighbours who had given him lunches and dinners. He was having the time of his life,
planting dahlia bulbs all over his garden.
‘I’ll have a field of many-coloured dahlias!’ he announced. ‘Just wait till the end of
August!’
‘Watch out for those porcupines,’ warned his sister. ‘They eat dahlia bulbs too!’
Mr Mani made an inspection tour of his moat, no longer in flood, and found
everything in good order. Prakash had done his job well.
Now, when the children crossed the stream, they found that the water-level had risen by
about a foot. Small cascades had turned into waterfalls. Ferns had sprung up on the
banks. Frogs chanted.
Prakash and his dog dashed across the stream. Bina and Sonu followed more
cautiously. The current was much stronger now and the water was almost up to their
knees. Once they had crossed the stream, they hurried along the path, anxious not to be
caught in a sudden downpour.
By the time they reached school, each of them had two or three leeches clinging to
their legs. They had to use salt to remove them. The leeches were the most troublesome
part of the rainy season. Even the leopard did not like them. It could not lie in the long
grass without getting leeches on its paws and face.
One day, when Bina, Prakash and Sonu were about to cross the stream they heard a
low rumble, which grew louder every second. Looking up at the opposite hill, they saw
several trees shudder, tilt outwards and begin to fall. Earth and rocks bulged out from
the mountain, then came crashing down into the ravine.
‘Landslide!’ shouted Sonu.
‘It’s carried away the path,’ said Bina. ‘Don’t go any further.’
There was a tremendous roar as more rocks, trees and bushes fell away and crashed
down the hillside.
Prakash’s dog, who had gone ahead, came running back, tail between his legs.
They remained rooted to the spot until the rocks had stopped falling and the dust had
settled. Birds circled the area, calling wildly. A frightened barking-deer ran past them.
‘We can’t go to school now,’ said Prakash. ‘There’s no way around.’
They turned and trudged home through the gathering mist.
In Koli, Prakash’s parents had heard the roar of the landslide. They were setting out
in search of the children when they saw them emerge from the mist, waving cheerfully.

9
They had to miss school for another three days, and Bina was afraid they might not be
able to take their final exams. Although Prakash was not really troubled at the thought of
missing exams, he did not like feeling helpless just because their path had been swept
away. So he explored the hillside until he found a goat-track going around the mountain.
It joined up with another path near Nauti. This made their walk longer by a mile, but
Bina did not mind. It was much cooler now that the rains were in full swing.
The only trouble with the new route was that it passed close to the leopard’s lair.
The animal had made this area its own since being forced to leave the dam area.
One day Prakash’s dog ran ahead of them, barking furiously. Then he ran back,
whimpering.
‘He’s always running away from something,’ observed Sonu. But a minute later he
understood the reason for the dog’s fear.
They rounded a bend and Sonu saw the leopard standing in their way. They were
struck dumb – too terrified to run. It was a strong, sinewy creature. A low growl rose
from its throat. It seemed ready to spring.
They stood perfectly still, afraid to move or say a word. And the leopard must have
been equally surprised. It stared at them for a few seconds, then bounded across the
path and into the oak forest.
Sonu was shaking. Bina could hear her heart hammering. Prakash could only
stammer: ‘Did you see the way he sprang? Wasn’t he beautiful?’
He forgot to look at his watch for the rest of the day.
A few days later Sonu stopped and pointed to a large outcrop of rock on the next
hill.
The leopard stood far above them, outlined against the sky. It looked strong,
majestic. Standing beside it were two young cubs.
‘Look at those little ones!’ exclaimed Sonu.
‘So it’s a female, not a male,’ said Prakash.
‘That’s why she was killing so often,’ said Bina. ‘She had to feed her cubs too.’
They remained still for several minutes, gazing up at the leopard and her cubs. The
leopard family took no notice of them.
‘She knows we are here,’ said Prakash, ‘but she doesn’t care. She knows we won’t
harm them.’
‘We are cubs too!’ said Sonu.
‘Yes,’ said Bina. ‘And there’s still plenty of space for all of us. Even when the dam
is ready there will still be room for leopards and humans.’
10

The school exams were over. The rains were nearly over too. The landslide had been
cleared, and Bina, Prakash and Sonu were once again crossing the stream.
There was a chill in the air, for it was the end of September.
Prakash had learnt to play the flute quite well, and he played on the way to school
and then again on the way home. As a result he did not look at his watch so often.
One morning they found a small crowd in front of Mr Mani’s house.
‘What could have happened?’ wondered Bina. ‘I hope he hasn’t got lost again.’
‘Maybe he’s sick,’ said Sonu.
‘Maybe it’s the porcupines,’ said Prakash.
But it was none of these things.
Mr Mani’s first dahlia was in bloom, and half the village had turned out to look at it!
It was a huge red double dahlia, so heavy that it had to be supported with sticks. No one
had ever seen such a magnificent flower!
Mr Mani was a happy man. And his mood only improved over the coming week, as
more and more dahlias flowered – crimson, yellow, purple, mauve, white – button
dahlias, pompom dahlias, spotted dahlias, striped dahlias… Mr Mani had them all! A
dahlia even turned up on Tania Romola’s desk – he got on quite well with her now –
and another brightened up the headmaster’s study.
A week later, on their way home – it was almost the last day of the school term –
Bina, Prakash and Sonu talked about what they might do when they grew up.
‘I think I’ll become a teacher,’ said Bina. ‘I’ll teach children about animals and
birds, and trees and flowers.’
‘Better than maths!’ said Prakash.
‘I’ll be a pilot,’ said Sonu. ‘I want to fly a plane like Miss Ramola’s brother.’
‘And what about you, Prakash?’ asked Bina.
Prakash just smiled and said, ‘Maybe I’ll be a flute-player,’ and he put the flute to he
lips and played a sweet melody.
‘Well, the world needs flute-players too,’ said Bina, as they fell into step beside
him.
The leopard had been stalking a barking-deer. She paused when she heard the flute
and the voices of the children. Her own young ones were growing quickly, but the girl
and the two boys did not look much older.
They had started singing their favourite song again.
Five more miles to go!
We climb through rain and snow,
A river to cross…
A mountain to pass…
Now we’ve four more miles to go!

The leopard waited until they had passed, before returning to the trail of the barkingdeer.

The Wind on Haunted Hill
hoo, whoo, whoo, cried the wind as it swept down from the Himalayan snows. It
hurried over the hills and passed and hummed and moaned through the tall pines
and deodars. There was little on Haunted Hill to stop the wind – only a few stunted
trees and bushes and the ruins of a small settlement.
On the slopes of the next hill was a village. People kept large stones on their tin
roofs to prevent them from being blown off. There was nearly always a strong wind in
these parts. Three children were spreading clothes out to dry on a low stone wall,
putting a stone on each piece.
Eleven-year-old Usha, dark-haired and rose-cheeked, struggled with her
grandfather’s long, loose shirt. Her younger brother, Suresh, was doing his best to hold
down a bedsheet, while Usha’s friend, Binya, a slightly older girl, helped.
Once everything was firmly held down by stones, they climbed up on the flat rocks
and sat there sunbathing and staring across the fields at the ruins on Haunted Hill.
‘I must go to the bazaar today,’ said Usha.
‘I wish I could come too,’ said Binya. ‘But I have to help with the cows.’
‘I can come!’ said eight-year-old Suresh. He was always ready to visit the bazaar,
which was three miles away, on the other side of the hill.
‘No, you can’t,’ said Usha. ‘You must help Grandfather chop wood.’
‘Won’t you feel scared returning alone?’ he asked. ‘There are ghosts on Haunted
Hill!’
‘I’ll be back before dark. Ghosts don’t appear during the day.’
‘Are there lots of ghosts in the ruins?’ asked Binya.
‘Grandfather says so. He says that over a hundred years ago, some Britishers lived
on the hill. But the settlement was always being struck by lightning, so they moved
away.’
‘But if they left, why is the place visited by ghosts?’
‘Because – Grandfather says – during a terrible storm, one of the houses was hit by
lightning, and everyone in it was killed. Even the children.’
‘How many children?’
‘Two. A boy and his sister. Grandfather saw them playing there in the moonlight.’
‘Wasn’t he frightened?’
‘No. Old people don’t mind ghosts.’
Usha set out for the bazaar at two in the afternoon. It was about an hour’s walk. The
path went through yellow fields of flowering mustard, then along the saddle of the hill,

and up, straight through the ruins. Usha had often gone that way to shop at the bazaar or
to see her aunt, who lived in the town nearby.
Wild flowers bloomed on the crumbling walls of the ruins, and a wild plum tree
grew straight out of the floor of what had once been a hall. It was covered with soft,
white blossoms. Lizards scuttled over the stones, while a whistling thrush, its deep
purple plumage glistening in the sunshine, sat on a window-sill and sang its heart out.
Usha sang too, as she skipped lightly along the path, which dipped steeply down to
the valley and led to the little town with its quaint bazaar.
Moving leisurely, Usha bought spices, sugar and matches. With the two rupees she
had saved from her pocket-money, she chose a necklace of amber-coloured beads for
herself and some marbles for Suresh. Then she had her mother’s slippers repaired at a
cobbler’s shop.
Finally, Usha went to visit Aunt Lakshmi at her flat above the shops. They were
talking and drinking cups of hot, sweet tea when Usha realised that dark clouds had
gathered over the mountains. She quickly picked up her things, said goodbye to her aunt,
and set out for the village.
Strangely, the wind had dropped. The trees were still, the crickets silent. The crows
flew round in circles, then settled on an oak tree.
‘I must get home before dark,’ thought Usha, hurrying along the path.
But the sky had darkened and a deep rumble echoed over the hills. Usha felt the first
heavy drop of rain hit her cheek. Holding the shopping bag close to her body, she
quickened her pace until she was almost running. The raindrops were coming down
faster now – cold, stinging pellets of rain. A flash of lightning sharply outlined the ruins
on the hill, and then all was dark again. Night had fallen.
‘I’ll have to shelter in the ruins,’ Usha thought and began to run. Suddenly the wind
sprang up again, but she did not have to fight it. It was behind her now, helping her
along, up the steep path and on to the brow of the hill. There was another flash of
lightning, followed by a peal of thunder. The ruins loomed before her, grim and
forbidding.
Usha remembered part of an old roof that would give some shelter. It would be
better than trying to go on. In the dark, with the howling wind, she might stray off the
path and fall over the edge of the cliff.
Whoo, whoo, whoo, howled the wind. Usha saw the wild plum tree swaying, its
foliage thrashing against the ground. She found her way into the ruins, helped by the
constant flicker of lightning. Usha placed her hands flat against a stone wall and moved
sideways, hoping to reach the sheltered corner. Suddenly, her hand touched something
soft and furry, and she gave a startled cry. Her cry was answered by another – half
snarl, half screech – as something leapt away in the darkness.
With a sigh of relief Usha realised that it was the cat that lived in the ruins. For a
moment she had been frightened, but now she moved quickly along the wall until she

heard the rain drumming on a remnant of a tin roof. Crouched in a corner, she found
some shelter. But the tin sheet groaned and clattered as if it would sail away any
moment.
Usha remembered that across this empty room stood an old fireplace. Perhaps it
would be drier there under the blocked chimney. But she would not attempt to find it
just now – she might lose her way altogether.
Her clothes were soaked and water streamed down from her hair, forming a puddle
at her feet. She thought she heard a faint cry – the cat again, or an owl? Then the storm
blotted out all other sounds.
There had been no time to think of ghosts, but now that she was settled in one place,
Usha remembered Grandfather’s story about the lightning-blasted ruins. She hoped and
prayed that lightning would not strike her.
Thunder boomed over the hills, and the lightning came quicker now. Then there was
a bigger flash, and for a moment the entire ruin was lit up. A streak of blue sizzled
along the floor of the building. Usha was staring straight ahead, and, as the opposite
wall lit up, she saw, crouching in front of the unused fireplace, two small figures –
children!
The ghostly figures seemed to look up and stare back at Usha. And then everything
was dark again.
Usha’s heart was in her mouth. She had seen without doubt, two ghosts on the other
side of the room. She wasn’t going to remain in the ruins one minute longer.
She ran towards the big gap in the wall through which she had entered. She was
halfway across the open space when something – someone – fell against her. Usha
stumbled, got up, and again bumped into something. She gave a frightened scream.
Someone else screamed. And then there was a shout, a boy’s shout, and Usha instantly
recognised the voice.
‘Suresh!’
‘Usha!’
‘Binya!’
They fell into each other’s arms, so surprised and relieved that all they could do
was laugh and giggle and repeat each other’s names.
Then Usha said, ‘I thought you were ghosts.’
‘We thought you were a ghost,’ said Suresh.
‘Come back under the roof,’ said Usha.
They huddled together in the corner, chattering with excitement and relief.
‘When it grew dark, we came looking for you,’ said Binya. ‘And then the storm
broke.’
‘Shall we run back together?’ asked Usha. ‘I don’t want to stay here any longer.’
‘We’ll have to wait,’ said Binya. ‘The path has fallen away at one place. It won’t be
safe in the dark, in all this rain.’

‘We’ll have to wait till morning,’ said Suresh, ‘and I’m so hungry!’
The storm continued, but they were not afraid now. They gave each other warmth
and confidence. Even the ruins did not seem so forbidding.
After an hour the rain stopped, and the thunder grew more distant.
Towards dawn the whistling thrush began to sing. Its sweet, broken notes flooded
the ruins with music. As the sky grew lighter, they saw that the plum tree stood upright
again, though it had lost all its blossoms.
‘Let’s go,’ said Usha.
Outside the ruins, walking along the brow of the hill, they watched the sky grow
pink. When they were some distance away, Usha looked back and said, ‘Can you see
something behind the wall? It’s like a hand waving.’
‘It’s just the top of the plum tree,’ said Binya.
‘Goodbye, goodbye…’ They heard voices.
‘Who said “goodbye”?’ asked Usha.
‘Not I,’ said Suresh.
‘Nor I,’ said Binya.
‘I heard someone calling,’ said Usha.
‘It’s only the wind,’ assured Binya.
Usha looked back at the ruins. The sun had come up and was touching the top of the
wall.
‘Come on,’ said Suresh. ‘I’m hungry.’
They hurried along the path to the village.
‘Goodbye, goodbye…’ Usha heard them calling. Or was it just the wind?

Romi and the Wildfire
1
s Romi was about to mount his bicycle, he saw smoke rising from behind the
distant line of trees.
‘It looks like a forest fire,’ said Prem, his friend and classmate.
‘It’s well to the east,’ said Romi. ‘Nowhere near the road.’
‘There’s a strong wind,’ said Prem, looking at the dry leaves swirling across the
road.
It was the middle of May, and it hadn’t rained in the Terai for several weeks. The
grass was brown, the leaves of the trees covered with dust. Even though it was getting
on to six o’clock in the evening, the boys’ shirts were damp with sweat.
‘It will be getting dark soon,’ said Prem. ‘You’d better spend the night at my house.’
‘No, I said I’d be home tonight. My father isn’t keeping well. The doctor has given
me some tablets for him.’
‘You’d better hurry, then. That fire seems to be spreading.’
‘Oh, it’s far off. It will take me only forty minutes to ride through the forest. ‘Bye,
Prem – see you tomorrow!’
Romi mounted his bicycle and pedalled off down the main road of the village,
scattering stray hens, stray dogs and stray villagers.
‘Hey, look where you’re going!’ shouted an angry villager, leaping out of the way of
the oncoming bicycle. ‘Do you think you own the road?’
‘Of course I own it,’ called Romi cheerfully, and cycled on.
His own village lay about seven miles distant, on the other side of the forest; but
there was only a primary school in his village, and Romi was now in High School. His
father, who was a fairly wealthy sugarcane farmer, had only recently bought him the
bicycle. Romi didn’t care too much for school and felt there weren’t enough holidays;
but he enjoyed the long rides, and he got on well with his classmates.
He might have stayed the night with Prem had it not been for the tablets which the
Vaid – the village doctor – had given him for his father.
Romi’s father was having back trouble, and the medicine had been specially
prepared from local herbs.
Having been given such a fine bicycle, Romi felt that the least he could do in return
was to get those tablets to his father as early as possible.
He put his head down and rode swiftly out of the village. Ahead of him, the smoke
rose from the burning forest and the sky glowed red.

2
He had soon left the village far behind. There was a slight climb, and Romi had to push
harder on the pedals to get over the rise. Once over the top, the road went winding
down to the edge of the sub-tropical forest.
This was the part Romi enjoyed most. He relaxed, stopped pedalling, and allowed
the bicycle to glide gently down the slope. Soon the wind was rushing past him,
blowing his hair about his face and making his shirt billow out behind. He burst into
song.
A dog from the village ran beside him, barking furiously. Romi shouted to the dog,
encouraging him in the race.
Then the road straightened out, and Romi began pedalling again.
The dog, seeing the forest ahead, turned back to the village. It was afraid of the
forest.
The smoke was thicker now, and Romi caught the smell of burning timber. But ahead
of him the road was clear. He rode on.
It was a rough, dusty road, cut straight through the forest. Tall trees grew on either
side, cutting off the last of the daylight. But the spreading glow of the fire on the right lit
up the road, and giant tree-shadows danced before the boy on the bicycle.
Usually the road was deserted. This evening it was alive with wild creatures fleeing
from the forest fire.
The first animal that Romi saw was a hare, leaping across the road in front of him. It
was followed by several more hares. Then a band of monkeys streamed across,
chattering excitedly.
They’ll be safe on the other side, thought Romi. The fire won’t cross the road.
But it was coming closer. And realising this, Romi pedalled harder. In half-an-hour
he should be out of the forest.
Suddenly, from the side of the road, several pheasants rose in the air, and with a
whoosh, flew low across the path, just in front of the oncoming bicycle. Taken by
surprise, Romi fell off. When he picked himself up and began brushing his clothes, he
saw that his knee was bleeding. It wasn’t a deep cut, but he allowed it to bleed a little,
took out his handkerchief and bandaged his knee. Then he mounted the bicycle again.
He rode a bit slower now, because birds and animals kept coming out of the bushes.
Not only pheasants but smaller birds, too, were streaming across the road – parrots,
jungle crows, owls, magpies – and the air was filled with their cries.
‘Everyone’s on the move,’ thought Romi. It must be a really big fire.
He could see the flames now, reaching out from behind the trees on his right, and he
could hear the crackling as the dry leaves caught fire. The air was hot on his face.
Leaves, still alight or turning to cinders, floated past.
A herd of deer crossed the road, and Romi had to stop until they had passed. Then he

mounted again and rode on; but now, for the first time, he was feeling afraid.
3
From ahead came a faint clanging sound. It wasn’t an animal sound, Romi was sure of
that. A fire-engine? There were no fire-engines within fifty miles.
The clanging came nearer, and Romi discovered that the noise came from a small
boy who was running along the forest path, two milk-cans clattering at his side
‘Teju!’ called Romi, recognising the boy from a neighbouring village. ‘What are you
doing out here?’
‘Trying to get home, of course,’ said Teju, panting along beside the bicycle.
‘Jump on,’ said Romi, stopping for him.
Teju was only eight or nine – a couple of years younger than Romi. He had come to
deliver milk to some road-workers, but the workers had left at the first signs of the fire,
and Teju was hurrying home with his cans still full of milk.
He got up on the cross-bar of the bicycle, and Romi moved on again. He was quite
used to carrying friends on the crossbar.
‘Keep beating your milk-cans,’ said Romi. ‘Like that, the animals will know we are
coming. My bell doesn’t make enough noise. I’m going to get a horn for my cycle!’
‘I never knew there were so many animals in the jungle,’ said Teju. ‘I saw a python
in the middle of the road. It stretched right across!’
‘What did you do?’
‘Just kept running and jumped right over it!’
Teju continued to chatter but Romi’s thoughts were on the fire, which was much
closer now. Flames shot up from the dry grass and ran up the trunks of trees and along
the branches. Smoke billowed out above the forest.
Romi’s eyes were smarting and his hair and eyebrows felt scorched. He was feeling
tired but he couldn’t stop now, he had to get beyond the range of the fire. Another ten or
fifteen minutes of steady riding would get them to the small wooden bridge that spanned
the little river separating the forest from the sugarcane fields.
Once across the river, they would be safe. The fire could not touch them on the other
side, because the forest ended at the river’s edge. But could they get to the river in
time?
4
Clang, clang, clang, went Teju’s milk-cans. But the sound of the fire grew louder too.
A tall silk-cotton tree, its branches leaning across the road, had caught fire. They
were almost beneath it when there was a crash and a burning branch fell to the ground a
few yards in front of them.

The boys had to get off the bicycle and leave the road, forcing their way through a
tangle of thorny bushes on the left, dragging and pushing at the bicycle and only
returning to the road some distance ahead of the burning tree.
‘We won’t get out in time,’ said Teju, back on the cross-bar but feeling disheartened.
‘Yes, we will,’ said Romi, pedalling with all his might. ‘The fire hasn’t crossed the
road as yet.’
Even as he spoke, he saw a small flame leap up from the grass on the left. It
wouldn’t be long before more sparks and burning leaves were blown across the road to
kindle the grass on the other side.
‘Oh, look!’ exclaimed Romi, bringing the bicycle to a sudden stop.
‘What’s wrong now?’ asked Teju, rubbing his sore eyes. And then, through the
smoke, he saw what was stopping them.
An elephant was standing in the middle of the road.
Teju slipped off the cross-bar, his cans rolling on the ground, bursting open and
spilling their contents.
The elephant was about forty feet away. It moved about restlessly, its big ears
flapping as it turned its head from side to side, wondering which way to go.
From far to the left, where the forest was still untouched, a herd of elephants moved
towards the river. The leader of the herd raised his trunk and trumpeted a call. Hearing
it, the elephant in the road raised its own trunk and trumpeted a reply. Then it shambled
off into the forest, in the direction of the herd, leaving the way clear.
‘Come, Teju, jump on!’ urged Romi. ‘We can’t stay here much longer!’
5
Teju forgot about his milk-cans and pulled himself up on the cross-bar. Romi ran
forward with the bicycle, to gain speed, and mounted swiftly. He kept as far as possible
to the left of the road, trying to ignore the flames, the crackling, the smoke and the
scorching heat.
It seemed that all the animals who could get away had done so. The exodus across
the road had stopped.
‘We won’t stop again,’ said Romi, gritting his teeth. ‘Not even for an elephant!’
‘We’re nearly there!’ said Teju. He was perking up again.
A jackal, overcome by the heat and smoke, lay in the middle of the path, either dead
or unconscious. Romi did not stop. He swerved round the animal. Then he put all his
strength into one final effort.
He covered the last hundred yards at top speed, and then they were out of the forest,
free-wheeling down the sloping road to the river.
‘Look!’ shouted Teju. ‘The bridge is on fire!’
Burning embers had floated down on to the small wooden bridge, and the dry,

ancient timber had quickly caught fire. It was now burning fiercely.
Romi did not hesitate. He left the road, riding the bicycle over sand and pebbles.
Then with a rush they went down the river-bank and into the water.
The next thing they knew they were splashing around, trying to find each other in the
darkness.
‘Help!’ cried Teju. ‘I’m drowning!’
6
‘Don’t be silly,’ said Romi. ‘The water isn’t deep – it’s only up to the knees. Come here
and grab hold of me.’
Teju splashed across and grabbed Romi by the belt.
‘The water’s so cold,’ he said, his teeth chattering.
‘Do you want to go back and warm yourself?’ asked Romi. ‘Some people are never
satisfied. Come on, help me get the bicycle up. It’s down here, just where we are
standing.’
Together they managed to heave the bicycle out of the water and stand it upright.
‘Now sit on it,’ said Romi. ‘I’ll push you across.’
‘We’ll be swept away,’ said Teju.
‘No, we won’t. There’s not much water in the river at this time of the year. But the
current is quite strong in the middle, so sit still. All right?’
‘All right,’ said Teju nervously.
Romi began guiding the bicycle across the river, one hand on the seat and one hand
on the handlebar. The river was shallow and sluggish in midsummer; even so, it was
quite swift in the middle. But having got safely out of the burning forest, Romi was in
no mood to let a little river defeat him.
He kicked off his shoes, knowing they would be lost; and then gripping the smooth
stones of the river-bed with his toes, he concentrated on keeping his balance and getting
the bicycle and Teju through the middle of the stream. The water here came up to his
waist, and the current would have been too strong for Teju. But when they reached the
shallows, Teju got down and helped Romi push the bicycle.
They reached the opposite bank, and sank down on the grass.
‘We can rest now,’ said Romi. ‘But not all night – I’ve got some medicine to give to
my father.’ He felt in his pockets and found that the tablets in their envelope, had turned
into a soggy mess. ‘Oh well, he had to take them with water anyway,’ he said.
They watched the fire as it continued to spread through the forest. It had crossed the
road down which they had come. The sky was a bright red, and the river reflected the
colour of the sky.
Several elephants had found their way down to the river. They were cooling off by
spraying water on each other with their trunks. Further downstream there were deer and

other animals.
Romi and Teju looked at each other in the glow from the fire. They hadn’t known
each other very well before. But now they felt they had been friends for years.
‘What are you thinking about?’ asked Teju.
‘I’m thinking,’ said Romi, ‘that even if the fire is out in a day or two, it will be a
long time before the bridge is repaired. So it will be a nice long holiday from school!’
‘But you can walk across the river,’ said Teju. ‘You just did it.’
‘Impossible,’ said Romi. ‘It’s much too swift.’

Tiger My Friend
1
n the left bank of the river Ganges, where it flows out from the Himalayan
foothills, is a long stretch of heavy forest. There are villages on the fringe of the
forest, inhabited by farmers and herdsmen. Big-game hunters came to the area for many
years, and as a result the animals had been getting fewer. The trees, too, had been
disappearing slowly; and as the animals lost their food and shelter, they moved further
into the foothills.
There was a time when this forest had provided a home for some thirty to forty
tigers, but men in search of skins and trophies had shot them all, and now there
remained only one old tiger in the jungle. The hunters had tried to get him, too, but he
was a wise and crafty tiger, who knew the ways of man, and so far he had survived all
attempts on his life.
Although the tiger had passed the prime of his life, he had lost none of his majesty.
His muscles rippled beneath the golden yellow of his coat, and he walked through the
long grass with the confidence of one who knew that he was still a king, although his
subjects were fewer. His great head pushed through the foliage, and it was only his tail,
swinging high, that sometimes showed above the sea of grass.
He was heading for water, the water of a large marsh, where he sometimes went to
drink or cool off. The marsh was usually deserted except when the buffaloes from a
nearby village were brought there to bathe or wallow in the muddy water.
The tiger waited in the shelter of a rock, his ears pricked for any unfamiliar sound.
He knew that it was here that hunters sometimes waited for him with guns.
He walked into the water, amongst the water-lilies, and drank slowly. He was
seldom in a hurry when he ate or drank.
He raised his head and listened, one paw suspended in the air.
A strange sound had come to him on the breeze, and he was wary of strange sounds.
So he moved swiftly into the shelter of the tall grass that bordered the marsh, and
climbed a hillock until he reached his favourite rock. This rock was big enough to hide
him and to give him shade.
The sound he had heard was only a flute, sounding thin and reedy in the forest. It
belonged to Nandu, a slim brown boy who rode a buffalo. Nandu played vigorously on
the flute. Chottu, a slightly smaller boy, riding another buffalo, brought up the rear of the
herd.

There were eight buffaloes in the herd, which belonged to the families of Nandu and
Chottu, who were cousins. Their fathers sold buffalo-milk and butter in villages further
down the river.
The tiger had often seen them at the marsh, and he was not bothered by their
presence. He knew the village folk would leave him alone as long as he did not attack
their buffaloes. And as long as there were deer in the jungle, he would not be interested
in other prey.
He decided to move on and find a cool shady place in the heart of the jungle, where
he could rest during the hot afternoon and be free of the flies and mosquitoes that
swarmed around the marsh. At night he would hunt.
With a lazy grunt that was half a roar, ‘A-oonh!’ – he got off his haunches and
sauntered off into the jungle.
The gentlest of tigers’ roars can be heard a mile away, and the boys, who were
barely fifty yards distant, looked up immediately.
‘There he goes!’ said Nandu, taking the flute from his lips and pointing with it
towards the hillock. ‘Did you see him?’
‘I saw his tail, just before he disappeared. He’s a big tiger!’
‘Don’t’ call him tiger. Call him Uncle.’
‘Why?’ asked Chottu.
‘Because it’s unlucky to call a tiger a tiger. My father told me so. But if you meet a
tiger, and call him Uncle, he will leave you alone.’
‘I see,’ said Chottu. ‘You have to make him a relative. I’ll try and remember that.’
The buffaloes were now well into the march, and some of them were lying down in
the mud. Buffaloes love soft wet mud and will wallow in it for hours. Nandu and Chottu
were not so fond of the mud, so they went swimming in deeper water. Later, they rested
in the shade of an old silk-cotton tree.
It was evening, and the twilight fading fast, when the buffalo herd finally made its
way homeward, to be greeted outside the village by the barking of dogs, the gurgle of
hookah-pipes, and the homely smell of cow-dung smoke.
2
The following evening, when Nandu and Chottu came home with the buffalo herd, they
found a crowd of curious villagers surrounding a jeep in which sat three strangers with
guns. They were hunters, and they were accompanied by servants and a large store of
provisions.
They had heard that there was a tiger in the area, and they wanted to shoot it.
These men had money to spend; and, as most of the villagers were poor, they were
prepared to go into the forest to make a machaan or tree-platform for the hunters. The
platform, big enough to take the three men, was put up in the branches of a tall

mahogany tree.
Nandu was told by his father to tie a goat at the foot of the tree. While these
preparations were being made, Chottu slipped off and circled the area, with a plan of
his own in mind. He had no wish to see the tiger killed and he had decided to give it
some sort of warning. So he tied up bits and pieces of old clothing on small trees and
bushes. He knew the wily old king of the jungle would keep well away from the area if
he saw the bits of clothing – for where there were men’s clothes, there would be men.
The vigil kept by the hunters lasted all through the night, but the tiger did not come
near the tree. Perhaps he’d got Chottu’s warning; or perhaps he wasn’t hungry.
It was a cold night, and it wasn’t long before the hunters opened their flasks of rum.
Soon they were whispering among themselves; then they were chattering so loudly that
no wild animal would have come anywhere near them. By morning they were fast
asleep.
They looked grumpy and shamefaced as they trudged back to the village.
‘Wrong time of the year for tiger,’ said the first hunter.
‘Nothing left in these parts,’ said the second.
‘I think I’ve caught a cold,’ said the third. And they drove away in disgust.
It was not until the beginning of the summer that something happened to alter the hunting
habits of the tiger and bring him into conflict with the villagers.
There had been no rain for almost two months, and the tall jungle grass had become
a sea of billowy dry yellow. Some city-dwellers, camping near the forest, had been
careless while cooking and had started a forest fire. Slowly it spread into the interior,
from where the acrid fumes smoked the tiger out towards the edge of the jungle. As
night came on, the flames grew more vivid, the smell stronger. The tiger turned and
made for the marsh, where he knew he would be safe provided he swam across to the
little island in the centre.
Next morning he was on the island, which was untouched by the fire. But his
surroundings had changed. The slopes of the hills were black with burnt grass, and most
of the tall bamboo had disappeared. The deer and the wild pig, finding that their natural
cover had gone, moved further east.
When the fire had died down and the smoke had cleared, the tiger prowled through
the forest again but found no game. He drank at the marsh and settled down in a shady
spot to sleep the day away.
The tiger spent four days looking for game. By that time he was so hungry that he
even resorted to rooting among the dead leaves and burnt-out stumps of trees, searching
for worms and beetles. This was a sad comedown for the king of the jungle. But even
now he hesitated to leave the area in search of new hunting grounds, for he had a deep
fear and suspicion of the unknown forests further east – forests that were fast being
swept away by human habitation. He could have gone north, into the high mountains, but

they did not provide him with the long grass he needed for cover.
At break of day he came to the marsh. The water was now shallow and muddy, and a
green scum had spread over the top. He drank, and then lay down across his favourite
rock, hoping for a deer; but none came. He was about to get up and lope away when he
heard an animal approach.
The tiger at once slipped off his rock and flattened himself on the ground, his tawny
stripes merging with the dry grass.
A buffalo emerged from the jungle and came to the water. The buffalo was alone. He
was a big male, and his long curved horns lay right back across his shoulders. He
moved leisurely towards the water, completely unaware of the tiger’s presence.
The tiger hesitated before making his charge.
It was a long time – many years – since he had killed a buffalo, and he knew
instinctively that the villagers would be angry. But the pangs of hunger overcame his
caution. There was no morning breeze, everything was still, and the smell of the tiger
did not reach the buffalo. A monkey chattered on a nearby tree, but his warning went
unheeded.
Crawling stealthily on his stomach, the tiger skirted the edge of the marsh and
approached the buffalo from behind. The buffalo was standing in shallow water,
drinking, when the tiger charged from the side and sank his teeth into his victim’s thigh.
The buffalo staggered, but turned to fight. He snorted and lowered his horns at the
tiger. But the big cat was too fast for the brave buffalo. He bit into the other leg and the
buffalo crashed to the ground. Then the tiger moved in for the kill.
After resting, he began to eat. Although he had been starving for days, he could not
finish the huge carcass. And so he quenched his thirst at the marsh and dragged the
remains of the buffalo into the bushes, to conceal it from jackals and vultures; then he
went off to find a place to sleep.
He would return to the kill when he was hungry.
3
The herdsmen were naturally very upset when they discovered that a buffalo was
missing. And next day, when Nandu and Chottu came running home to say that they had
found the half-eaten carcass near the marsh, the men of the village grew angry. They
knew that once the tiger realised how easy it was to kill their animals, he would make a
habit of doing so.
Kundan Singh, Nandu’s father, who owned the buffalo, said he would go after the
tiger himself.
‘It’s too late now,’ said his wife. ‘You should never have let the buffalo roam on its
own.’
‘He had been on his own before. This is the first time the tiger has attacked one of

our animals.’
‘He must have been hungry,’ said Chottu.
‘Well, we are hungry too,’ said Kundan Singh. ‘Our best buffalo – the only male in
the herd. It will cost me at least two thousand rupees to buy another.’
‘The tiger will kill again,’ said Chottu’s father. ‘Many years ago there was a tiger
who did the same thing. He became a cattle-killer.’
‘Should we send for the hunters?’
‘No, they are clumsy fools. The tiger will return to the carcass for another meal. You
have a gun?’
Kundan Singh smiled proudly and, going to a cupboard, brought out a doublebarrelled gun. It looked ancient!
‘My father bought it from an Englishman,’ he said.
‘How long ago was that?’
‘About the time I was born.’
‘And have you ever used it?’ asked Chottu’s father, looking at the old gun with
distrust.
‘A few years ago I let it off at some bandits. Don’t you remember? When I fired,
they did not stop running until they had crossed the river.’
‘Yes, but did you hit anyone?’
‘I would have, if someone’s goat hadn’t got in the way.’
‘We had roast meat that night,’ said Nandu.
Accompanied by Chottu’s father and several others, Kundan set out for the marsh,
where, without shifting the buffalo’s carcass – for they knew the tiger would not come
near them if he suspected a trap – they made another tree-platform in the branches of a
tall tree some thirty feet from the kill.
Late that evening, Kundan Singh and Chottu’s father settled down for the night on
their rough platform.
Several hours passed and nothing but a jackal was seen by the watchers. And then,
just as the moon came up over the distant hills, the two men were startled by a low ‘Aoonh’, followed by a suppressed, rumbling growl.
Kundan tightened his grip on the old gun. There was complete silence for a minute
or two, then the sound of stealthy footfalls on the dead leaves beneath the tree.
A moment later the tiger walked out into the moonlight and stood over his kill.
At first Kundan could do nothing. He was completely taken aback by the size of the
tiger. Chottu’s father had to nudge him, and then Kundan quickly put the gun to his
shoulder, aimed at the tiger’s head, and pressed the trigger.
The gun went off with a flash and two loud bangs, as Kundan fired both barrels.
There was a tremendous roar. The tiger rushed at the tree and tried to leap into the
branches. Fortunately, the platform had been built at a good height, and the tiger was
unable to reach it.

He roared again and then bounded off into the forest.
‘What a tiger!’ exclaimed Kundan, half in fear and half in admiration.
‘You missed him completely,’ said Chottu’s father.
‘I did not,’ said Kundan. ‘You heard him roar! Would he have been so angry if he
had not been hit?’
‘Well, if you have only wounded him, he will turn into a man-eater – and where will
that leave us?’
‘He won’t be back,’ said Kundan. ‘He will leave this area.’
During the next few days the tiger lay low. He did not go near the marsh except when
it was very dark and he was very thirsty. The herdsmen and villagers decided that the
tiger had gone away. Nandu and Chottu – usually accompanied by other village youths,
and always carrying their small hand-axes – began bringing the buffaloes to the marsh
again during the day; they were careful not to let any of them stray far from the herd.
But one day, while the boys were taking the herd home, one of the buffaloes lagged
behind. Nandu did not realise that an animal was missing until he heard an agonised
bellow behind him. He glanced over his shoulder just in time to see the tiger dragging
the buffalo into a clump of bamboo. The herd sensed the danger, and the buffaloes
snorted with fear as they hurried along the forest path. To urge them forward and to
warn his friends, Nandu cupped his hands to his mouth and gave a yodelling call.
The buffaloes bellowed, the boys shouted, and the birds flew shrieking from the
trees. Together they stampeded out of the forest. The villagers heard the thunder of
hoofs, and saw the herd coming home amidst clouds of dust.
‘The tiger!’ called Nandu. ‘He is back! He has taken another buffalo!’
‘He is afraid of us no longer,’ thought Chottu. And now everyone will hate him and
do their best to kill him.
‘Did you see where he went?’ asked Kundan Singh, hurrying up to them.
‘I remember the place,’ said Nandu.
‘Then there is no time to lose,’ said Kundan. ‘I will take my gun and a few men, and
wait near the bridge. The rest of you must beat the jungle from this side and drive the
tiger towards me. He will not escape this time, unless he swims across the river!’
4
Kundan took his men and headed for the suspension bridge over the river, while the
others, guided by Nandu and Chottu, went to the spot where the tiger had seized the
buffalo.
The tiger was still eating when he heard the men coming. He had not expected to be
disturbed so soon. With an angry ‘Whoof!’ he bounded into the jungle, and watched the
men – there were some twenty of them – through a screen of leaves and tall grass.
The men carried hand drums slung from their shoulders, and some carried sticks and

spears. After a hurried consultation, they strung out in a line and entered the jungle
beating their drums.
The tiger did not like the noise. He went deeper into the jungle. But the men came
after him, banging away on their drums and shouting at the top of their voices. They
advanced singly or in pairs, but nowhere were they more than fifteen yards apart.
The tiger could easily have broken through this slowly advancing semi-circle of men
– one swift blow from his paw would have felled the strongest of them – but his main
object was to get away from the noise. He hated and feared the noise made by humans.
He was not a man-eater and he would not attack a man unless he was very angry or
very frightened; and as yet he was neither. He had eaten well, and he would have liked
to rest – but there would be no rest for him until the men ceased their tremendous clatter
and din.
Nandu and Chottu kept close to their elders, knowing it wouldn’t be safe to go back
on their own. Chottu felt sorry for the tiger.
‘Do they have to kill the tiger?’ he asked. ‘If they drive him across the river he
won’t come back, will he?’
‘Who knows?’ said Nandu. ‘He has found it’s easy to kill our buffaloes, and when
he’s hungry he’ll come again. We have to live too.’
Chottu was silent. He could see no way out for the tiger.
For an hour the villagers beat the jungle, shouting, drumming, and trampling the
undergrowth.
The tiger had no rest. Whenever he was able to put some distance between himself
and the men, he would sink down in some shady spot to rest; but, within a few minutes,
the trampling and drumming would come nearer, and with an angry snarl he would get
up again and pad northwards, along the narrowing strip of jungle, towards the bridge
across the river.
It was about noon when the tiger finally came into the open. The boys had a clear
view of him as he moved slowly along, now in the open with the sun glinting on his
glossy side, now in the shade or passing through the shorter grass. He was still out of
range of Kundan Singh’s gun, but there was no way in which he could retreat.
He disappeared among some bushes but soon reappeared to retrace his steps. The
beaters had done their work well. The tiger was now only about a-hundred-and-fifty
yards from the place where Kundan Singh waited.
The beat had closed in, the men were now bunched together. They were making a
great noise, but nothing moved.
Chottu, watching from a distance, wondered: Has he slipped through the beaters?
And in his heart he hoped so.
Tins clashed, drums beat, and some of the men poked into the reeds along the river
bank with their spears or bamboo sticks. Perhaps one of these thrusts found its mark,
because at last the tiger was roused, and with an angry, desperate snarl he charged out

of the reeds, splashing his way through an inlet of mud and water.
Kundan Singh fired and missed.
The tiger rushed forward, making straight for the only way across the river – the
suspension bridge that crossed it, providing a route into the hills beyond.
The suspension bridge swayed and trembled as the big tiger lurched across it.
Kundan fired again, and this time the bullet grazed the tiger’s shoulder.
The tiger bounded forward, lost his footing on the unfamiliar, slippery planks of the
swaying bridge, and went over the side, falling headlong into the swirling water of the
river.
He rose to the surface once, but the current took him under and away, and before
long he was lost to view.
5
At first the villagers were glad – they felt their buffaloes were safe. Then they began to
feel that something had gone out of their lives, out of the life of the forest. The forest
had been shrinking year by year, as more people had moved into the area; but as long as
the tiger had been there and they had heard him roar at night, they had known there was
still some distance between them and the ever-spreading towns and cities. Now that the
tiger had gone, it was as though a protector had gone.
The boys lay flat on their stomachs on their little mud island, and watched the
monsoon clouds gathering overhead.
‘The king of the jungle is dead,’ said Nandu. ‘There are no more tigers.’
‘There have to be tigers,’ said Chottu. ‘Can there be an India without tigers?’
The river had carried the tiger many miles away from his old home, from the forest he
had always known, and brought him ashore on the opposite bank of the river, on a strip
of warm yellow sand. Here he lay in the sun, quite still, breathing slowly.
Vultures gathered and waited at a distance, some of them perching on the branches of
nearby trees. But the tiger was more drowned than hurt, and as the river water oozed
out of his mouth, and the warm sun made new life throb through his body, he stirred and
stretched, and his glazed eyes came into focus. Raising his head, he saw trees and tall
grass.
Slowly he heaved himself off the ground and moved at a crouch to where the tall
grass waved in the afternoon breeze. Would he be hunted again, and shot at? There was
no smell of man. The tiger moved forward with greater confidence.
There was, however, another smell in the air, a smell that reached back to the time
when he was young and fresh and full of vigour; a smell that he had almost forgotten but
could never really forget – the smell of a tigress.
He lifted his head, and new life surged through his limbs. He gave a deep roar, ‘A-

oonh!’ and moved purposefully through the tall grass. And the roar came back to him,
calling him, urging him forward; a roar that meant there would be more tigers in the
land!
That night, half asleep on his cot, Chottu heard the tigers roaring to each other across
the river, and he recognised the roar of his own tiger. And from the vigour of its roar he
knew that it was alive and safe; and he was glad.
‘Let there be tigers forever,’ he whispered into the darkness before he fell asleep.

Monkey Trouble
randfather bought Tutu from a street entertainer for the sum of ten rupees. The man
had three monkeys. Tutu was the smallest, but the most mischievous. She was tied
up most of the time. The little monkey looked so miserable with a collar and chain that
Grandfather decided it would be much happier in our home. Grandfather had a
weakness for keeping unusual pets. It was a habit that I, at the age of eight or nine, used
to encourage.
Grandmother at first objected to having a monkey in the house. ‘You have enough
pets as it is,’ she said, referring to Grandfather’s goat, several white mice, and a small
tortoise.
‘But I don’t have any,’ I said.
‘You’re wicked enough for two monkeys. One boy in the house is all I can take.’
‘Ah, but Tutu isn’t a boy,’ said Grandfather triumphantly. ‘This is a little girl
monkey!’
Grandmother gave in. She had always wanted a little girl in the house. She believed
girls were less troublesome than boys. Tutu was to prove her wrong.
She was a pretty little monkey. Her bright eyes sparkled with mischief beneath deepset eyebrows. And her teeth, which were a pearly white, were often revealed in a grin
that frightened the wits out of Aunt Ruby, whose nerves had already suffered from the
presence of Grandfather’s pet python. But this was my grandparents’ house, and aunts
and uncles had to put up with our pets.
Tutu’s hands had a dried-up look, as though they had been pickled in the sun for
many years. One of the first things I taught her was to shake hands, and this she insisted
on doing with all who visited the house. Peppery Major Malik would have to stoop and
shake hands with Tutu before he could enter the drawing room, otherwise Tutu would
climb onto his shoulder and stay there, roughing up his hair and playing with his
moustache.
Uncle Benji couldn’t stand any of our pets and took a particular dislike to Tutu, who
was always making faces at him. But as Uncle Benji was never in a job for long, and
depended on Grandfather’s good-natured generosity, he had to shake hands with Tutu,
like everyone else.
Tutu’s fingers were quick and wicked. And her tail, while adding to her good looks
(Grandfather believed a tail would add to anyone’s good looks!), also served as a third
hand. She could use it to hang from a branch, and it was capable of scooping up any
delicacy that might be out of reach of her hands.
On one of Aunt Ruby’s visits, loud shrieks from her bedroom brought us running to

see what was wrong. It was only Tutu trying on Aunt Ruby’s petticoats! They were
much too large, of course, and when Aunt Ruby entered the room, all she saw was a
faceless white blob jumping up and down on the bed.
We disentangled Tutu and soothed Aunt Ruby. I gave Tutu a bunch of sweet-peas to
make her happy. Granny didn’t like anyone plucking her sweet-peas, so I took some
from Major Malik’s garden while he was having his afternoon siesta.
Then Uncle Benji complained that his hairbrush was missing. We found Tutu sunning
herself on the back veranda, using the hairbrush to scratch her armpits.
I took it from her and handed it back to Uncle Benji with an apology; but he flung the
brush away with an oath.
‘Such a fuss about nothing,’ I said. ‘Tutu doesn’t have fleas!’
‘No, and she bathes more often than Benji,’ said Grandfather, who had borrowed
Aunt Ruby’s shampoo to give Tutu a bath.
All the same, Grandmother objected to Tutu being given the run of the house. Tutu
had to spend her nights in the outhouse, in the company of the goat. They got on quite
well, and it was not long before Tutu was seen sitting comfortably on the back of the
goat, while the goat roamed the back garden in search of its favourite grass.
The day Grandfather had to visit Meerut to collect his railway pension, he decided
to take Tutu and me along to keep us both out of mischief, he said. To prevent Tutu from
wandering about on the train, causing inconvenience to passengers, she was provided
with a large black travelling bag. This, with some straw at the bottom, became her
compartment. Grandfather and I paid for our seats, and we took Tutu along as hand
baggage.
There was enough space for Tutu to look out of the bag occasionally, and to be fed
with bananas and biscuits, but she could not get her hands through the opening and the
canvas was too strong for her to bite her way through.
Tutu’s efforts to get out only had the effect of making the bag roll about on the floor
or occasionally jump into the air – an exhibition that attracted a curious crowd of
onlookers at the Dehra and Meerut railway stations.
Anyway, Tutu remained in the bag as far as Meerut, but while Grandfather was
producing our tickets at the turnstile, she suddenly poked her head out of the bag and
gave the ticket collector a wide grin.
The poor man was taken aback. But, with great presence of mind and much to
Grandfather’s annoyance, he said, ‘Sir, you have a dog with you. You’ll have to buy a
ticket for it.’
‘It’s not a dog!’ said Grandfather indignantly. ‘This is a baby monkey of the species
macacus-mischievous, closely related to the human species homus-horriblis! And
there is no charge for babies!’
‘It’s as big as a cat,’ said the ticket collector, ‘Cats and dogs have to be paid for.’
‘But, I tell you, it’s only a baby!’ protested Grandfather.

‘Have you a birth certificate to prove that?’ demanded the ticket collector.
‘Next, you’ll be asking to see her mother,’ snapped Grandfather.
In vain did he take Tutu out of the bag. In vain did he try to prove that a young
monkey did not qualify as a dog or a cat or even as a quadruped. Tutu was classified as
a dog by the ticket collector, and five rupees were handed over as her fare.
Then Grandfather, just to get his own back, took from his pocket the small tortoise
that he sometimes carried about, and said: ‘And what must I pay for this, since you
charge for all creatures great and small?’
The ticket collector looked closely at the tortoise, prodded it with his forefinger,
gave Grandfather a triumphant look, and said, ‘No charge, sir. It is not a dog!’
Winters in North India can be very cold. A great treat for Tutu on winter evenings was
the large bowl of hot water given to her by Grandfather for a bath. Tutu would
cunningly test the temperature with her hand, then gradually step into the bath, first one
foot, then the other (as she had seen me doing) until she was in the water upto her neck.
Once comfortable, she would take the soap in her hands or feet and rub herself all
over. When the water became cold, she would get out and run as quickly as she could to
the kitchen fire in order to dry herself. If anyone laughed at her during this performance,
Tutu’s feelings would be hurt and she would refuse to go on with the bath.
One day Tutu almost succeeded in boiling herself alive. Grandmother had left a
large kettle on the fire for tea. And Tutu, all by herself and with nothing better to do,
decided to remove the lid. Finding the water just warm enough for a bath, she got in,
with her head sticking out from the open kettle.
This was fine for a while, until the water began to get heated. Tutu raised herself a
little. But finding it cold outside, she sat down again. She continued hopping up and
down for some time, until Grandmother returned and hauled her, half-boiled, out of the
kettle.
‘What’s for tea today?’ asked Uncle Benji gleefully. ‘Boiled eggs and a half-boiled
monkey?’
But Tutu was none the worse for the adventure and continued to bathe more regularly
than Uncle Benji.
Aunt Ruby was a frequent taker of baths. This met with Tutu’s approval – so much
so that, one day, when Aunt Ruby had finished shampooing her hair, she looked up
through a lather of bubbles and soap-suds to see Tutu sitting opposite her in the bath,
following her example.
One day Aunt Ruby took us all by surprise. She announced that she had become
engaged. We had always thought Aunt Ruby would never marry – she had often said so
herself – but it appeared that the right man had now come along in the person of Rocky
Fernandes, a schoolteacher from Goa.

Rocky was a tall, firm-jawed, good-natured man, a couple of years younger than
Aunt Ruby. He had a fine baritone voice and sang in the manner of the great Nelson
Eddy. As Grandmother liked baritone singers, Rocky was soon in her good books.
‘But what on earth does he see in her?’ Uncle Benji wanted to know.
‘More than any girl has seen in you!’ snapped Grandmother. ‘Ruby’s a fine girl. And
they’re both teachers. Maybe they can start a school of their own.’
Rocky visited the house quite often and brought me chocolates and cashew nuts, of
which he seemed to have an unlimited supply. He also taught me several marching
songs. Naturally, I approved of Rocky. Aunt Ruby won my grudging admiration for
having made such a wise choice.
One day I overheard them talking of going to the bazaar to buy an engagement ring. I
decided I would go along, too. But as Aunt Ruby had made it clear that she did not want
me around, I decided that I had better follow at a discreet distance. Tutu, becoming
aware that a mission of some importance was under way, decided to follow me. But as
I had not invited her along, she too decided to keep out of sight.
Once in the crowded bazaar, I was able to get quite close to Aunt Ruby and Rocky
without being spotted. I waited until they had settled down in a large jewellery shop
before sauntering past and spotting them, as though by accident. Aunt Ruby wasn’t too
pleased at seeing me, but Rocky waved and called out, ‘Come and join us! Help your
aunt choose a beautiful ring!’
The whole thing seemed to be a waste of good money, but I did not say so – Aunt
Ruby was giving me one of her more unloving looks.
‘Look, these are pretty!’ I said, pointing to some cheap, bright agates set in white
metal. But Aunt Ruby wasn’t looking. She was immersed in a case of diamonds.
‘Why not a ruby for Aunt Ruby?’ I suggested, trying to please her.
‘That’s her lucky stone,’ said Rocky. ‘Diamonds are the thing for engagements.’ And
he started singing a song about a diamond being a girl’s best friend.
While the jeweller and Aunt Ruby were sifting through the diamond rings, and
Rocky was trying out another tune, Tutu had slipped into the shop without being noticed
by anyone but me. A little squeal of delight was the first sign she gave of her presence.
Everyone looked up to see her trying on a pretty necklace.
‘And what are those stones?’ I asked.
‘They look like pearls,’ said Rocky.
‘They are pearls,’ said the shopkeeper, making a grab for them.
‘It’s that dreadful monkey!’ cried Aunt Ruby. ‘I knew that boy would bring him
here!’
The necklace was already adorning Tutu’s neck. I thought she looked rather nice in
pearls, but she gave us no time to admire the effect. Springing out of our reach, Tutu
dodged around Rocky, slipped between my legs, and made for the crowded road. I ran
after her, shouting to her to stop, but she wasn’t listening.

There were no branches to assist Tutu in her progress, but she used the heads and
shoulders of people as springboards and so made rapid headway through the bazaar.
The jeweller left his shop and ran after us. So did Rocky. So did several bystanders,
who had seen the incident. And others, who had no idea what it was all about, joined in
the chase. As Grandfather used to say, ‘In a crowd, everyone plays follow-the-leader,
even when they don’t know who’s leading.’ Not everyone knew that the leader was
Tutu. Only the front runners could see her.
She tried to make her escape speedier by leaping onto the back of a passing
scooterist. The scooter swerved into a fruit stall and came to a standstill under a heap
of bananas, while the scooterist found himself in the arms of an indignant fruitseller.
Tutu peeled a banana and ate part of it, before deciding to move on.
From an awning she made an emergency landing on a washerman’s donkey. The
donkey promptly panicked and rushed down the road, while bundles of washing fell by
the wayside. The washerman joined in the chase. Children on their way to school
decided that there was something better to do than attend classes. With shouts of glee,
they soon overtook their panting elders.
Tutu finally left the bazaar and took a road leading in the direction of our house. But
knowing that she would be caught and locked up once she got home, she decided to end
the chase by ridding herself of the necklace. Deftly removing it from her neck, she flung
it in the small canal that ran down the road.
The jeweller, with a cry of anguish, plunged into the canal. So did Rocky. So did I.
So did several other people, both adults and children. It was to be a treasure hunt!
Some twenty minutes later, Rocky shouted, ‘I’ve found it!’ Covered in mud, waterlilies, ferns and tadpoles, we emerged from the canal, and Rocky presented the
necklace to the relieved shopkeeper.
Everyone trudged back to the bazaar to find Aunt Ruby waiting in the shop, still
trying to make up her mind about a suitable engagement ring.
Finally the ring was bought, the engagement was announced, and a date was set for
the wedding.
‘I don’t want that monkey anywhere near us on our wedding day,’ declared Aunt
Ruby.
‘We’ll lock her up in the outhouse,’ promised Grandfather. ‘And we’ll let her out
only after you’ve left for your honeymoon.’
A few days before the wedding I found Tutu in the kitchen, helping Grandmother
prepare the wedding cake. Tutu often helped with the cooking and, when Grandmother
wasn’t looking, added herbs, spices, and other interesting items to the pots – so that
occasionally we found a chilli in the custard or an onion in the jelly or a strawberry
floating in the chicken soup.
Sometimes these additions improved a dish, sometimes they did not. Uncle Benji
lost a tooth when he bit firmly into a sandwich which contained walnut shells.

I’m not sure exactly what went into that wedding cake when Grandmother wasn’t
looking – she insisted that Tutu was always very well-behaved in the kitchen – but I did
spot Tutu stirring in some red chilli sauce, bitter gourd seeds, and a generous helping of
egg-shells!
It’s true that some of the guests were not seen for several days after the wedding, but
no one said anything against the cake. Most people thought it had an interesting flavour.
The great day dawned, and the wedding guests made their way to the little church
that stood on the outskirts of Dehra – a town with a church, two mosques, and several
temples.
I had offered to dress Tutu up as a bridesmaid and bring her along, but no one except
Grandfather thought it was a good idea. So I was an obedient boy and locked Tutu in the
outhouse. I did, however, leave the skylight open a little. Grandmother had always said
that fresh air was good for growing children, and I thought Tutu should have her share
of it.
The wedding ceremony went without a hitch. Aunt Ruby looked a picture, and Rocky
looked like a film star.
Grandfather played the organ, and did so with such gusto that the small choir could
hardly be heard. Grandmother cried a little. I sat quietly in a corner, with the little
tortoise on my lap.
When the service was over, we trooped out into the sunshine and made our way
back to the house for the reception.
The feast had been laid out on tables in the garden. As the gardener had been left in
charge, everything was in order. Tutu was on her best behaviour. She had, it appeared,
used the skylight to avail of more fresh air outside, and now sat beside the three-tier
wedding cake, guarding it against crows, squirrels and the goat. She greeted the guests
with squeals of delight.
It was too much for Aunt Ruby. She flew at Tutu in a rage. And Tutu, sensing that she
was not welcome, leapt away, taking with her the top tier of the wedding cake.
Led by Major Malik, we followed her into the orchard, only to find that she had
climbed to the top of the jackfruit tree. From there she proceeded to pelt us with bits of
wedding cake. She had also managed to get hold of a bag of confetti, and when she ran
out of cake she showered us with confetti.
‘That’s more like it!’ said the good-humoured Rocky. ‘Now let’s return to the party,
folks!’
Uncle Benji remained with Major Malik, determined to chase Tutu away. He kept
throwing stones into the tree, until he received a large piece of cake bang on his nose.
Muttering threats, he returned to the party, leaving the major to do battle.
When the festivities were finally over, Uncle Benji took the old car out of the garage
and drove up the veranda steps. He was going to drive Aunt Ruby and Rocky to the

nearby hill resort of Mussoorie, where they would have their honeymoon.
Watched by family and friends, Aunt Ruby climbed into the back seat. She waved
regally to everyone. She leant out of the window and offered me her cheek and I had to
kiss her farewell. Everyone wished them luck.
As Rocky burst into song, Uncle Benji opened the throttle and stepped on the
accelerator. The car shot forward in a cloud of dust.
Rocky and Aunt Ruby continued to wave to us. And so did Tutu, from her perch on
the rear bumper! She was clutching a bag in her hands and showering confetti on all
who stood in the driveway.
‘They don’t know Tutu’s with them!’ I exclaimed. ‘She’ll go all the way to
Mussoorie! Will Aunt Ruby let her stay with them?’
‘Tutu might ruin the honeymoon,’ said Grandfather. ‘But don’t worry – our Benji
will bring her back!’

Snake Trouble
1
fter retiring from the Indian Railways and settling in Dehra, Grandfather often
made his days (and ours) more exciting by keeping unusual pets. He paid a snakecharmer in the bazaar twenty rupees for a young python. Then, to the delight of a curious
group of boys and girls, he slung the python over his shoulder and brought it home.
I was with him at the time, and felt very proud walking beside Grandfather. He was
popular in Dehra, especially among the poorer people, and everyone greeted him
politely without seeming to notice the python. They were, in fact, quite used to seeing
him in the company of strange creatures.
The first to see us arrive was Tutu the monkey, who was swinging from a branch of
the jackfruit tree. One look at the python, ancient enemy of his race, and he fled into the
house squealing with fright. Then our parrot, Popeye, who had his perch on the veranda,
set up the most awful shrieking and whistling. His whistle was like that of a steamengine. He had learnt to do this in earlier days, when we had lived near railway
stations.
The noise brought Grandmother to the veranda, where she nearly fainted at the sight
of the python curled round Grandfather’s neck.
Grandmother put up with most of his pets, but she drew the line at reptiles. Even a
sweet-tempered lizard made her blood run cold. There was little chance that she would
allow a python in the house.
‘It will strangle you to death!’ she cried.
‘Nonsense,’ said Grandfather. ‘He’s only a young fellow.’
‘He’ll soon get used to us,’ I added, by way of support.
‘He might, indeed,’ said Grandmother, ‘but I have no intention of getting used to him.
And your Aunt Ruby is coming to stay with us tomorrow. She’ll leave the minute she
knows there’s a snake in the house.’
‘Well, perhaps we should show it to her first thing,’ said Grandfather, who found
Aunt Ruby rather tiresome.
‘Get rid of it right away,’ said Grandmother.
‘I can’t let it loose in the garden. It might find its way into the chicken shed, and then
where will we be?’
‘Minus a few chickens,’ I said reasonably, but this only made Grandmother more
determined to get rid of the python.

‘Lock that awful thing in the bathroom,’ she said. ‘Go and find the man you bought it
from, and get him to come here and collect it! He can keep the money you gave him.’
Grandfather and I took the snake into the bathroom and placed it in an empty tub.
Looking a bit crestfallen, he said, ‘Perhaps your grandmother is right. I’m not worried
about Aunt Ruby, but we don’t want the python to get hold of Tutu or Popeye.’
We hurried off to the bazaar in search of the snake-charmer but hadn’t gone far when
we found several snake-charmers looking for us. They had heard that Grandfather was
buying snakes, and they had brought with them snakes of various sizes and descriptions.
‘No, no!’ protested Grandfather. ‘We don’t want more snakes. We want to return the
one we bought.’
But the man who had sold it to us had, apparently, returned to his village in the
jungle, looking for another python for Grandfather; and the other snake-charmers were
not interested in buying, only in selling. In order to shake them off, we had to return
home by a roundabout route, climbing a wall and cutting through an orchard. We found
Grandmother pacing up and down the veranda. One look at our faces and she knew we
had failed to get rid of the snake.
‘All right,’ said Grandmother. ‘Just take it away yourselves and see that it doesn’t
come back.’
‘We’ll get rid of it, Grandmother,’ I said confidently. ‘Don’t you worry.’
Grandfather opened the bathroom door and stepped into the room. I was close
behind him. We couldn’t see the python anywhere.
‘He’s gone,’ announced Grandfather.
‘We left the window open,’ I said.
‘Deliberately, no doubt,’ said Grandmother. ‘But it couldn’t have gone far. You’ll
have to search the grounds.’
A careful search was made of the house, the roof, the kitchen, the garden and the
chicken shed, but there was no sign of the python.
‘He must have gone over the garden wall,’ Grandfather said cheerfully. ‘He’ll be
well away by now!’
The python did not reappear, and when Aunt Ruby arrived with enough luggage to
show that she had come for a long visit, there was only the parrot to greet her with a
series of long, ear-splitting whistles.
2
For a couple of days Grandfather and I were a little worried that the python might make
a sudden reappearance, but when he didn’t show up again we felt he had gone for good.
Aunt Ruby had to put up with Tutu the monkey making faces at her, something I did only
when she wasn’t looking; and she complained that Popeye shrieked loudest when she
was in the room; but she was used to them, and knew she would have to bear with them

if she was going to stay with us.
And then, one evening, we were startled by a scream from the garden.
Seconds later Aunt Ruby came flying up the veranda steps, gasping, ‘In the guava
tree! I was reaching for a guava when I saw it staring at me. The look in its eyes! As
though it would eat me alive –’
‘Calm down, dear,’ urged Grandmother, sprinkling rose water over my aunt. ‘Tell
us, what did you see?’
‘A snake!’ sobbed Aunt Ruby. ‘A great boa constrictor in the guava tree. Its eyes
were terrible, and it looked at me in such a queer way.’
‘Trying to tempt you with a guava, no doubt,’ said Grandfather, turning away to hide
his smile. He gave me a look full of meaning, and I hurried out into the garden. But
when I got to the guava tree, the python (if it had been the python) had gone.
‘Aunt Ruby must have frightened it off,’ I told Grandfather.
‘I’m not surprised,’ he said. ‘But it will be back, Ranji. I think it has taken a fancy to
your aunt.’
Sure enough, the python began to make brief but frequent appearances, usually up in
the most unexpected places.
One morning I found him curled up on a dressing-table, gazing at his own reflection
in the mirror. I went for Grandfather, but by the time we returned the python had moved
on.
He was seen again in the garden, and one day I spotted him climbing the iron ladder
to the roof. I set off after him, and was soon up the ladder, which I had climbed up many
times. I arrived on the flat roof just in time to see the snake disappearing down a
drainpipe. The end of his tail was visible for a few moments and then that too
disappeared.
‘I think he lives in the drainpipe,’ I told Grandfather.
‘Where does it get its food?’ asked Grandmother.
‘Probably lives on those field rats that used to be such a nuisance. Remember, they
lived in the drainpipes, too.’
‘Hmm…’ Grandmother looked thoughtful. ‘A snake has its uses. Well, as long as it
keeps to the roof and prefers rats to chickens…’
But the python did not confine itself to the roof. Piercing shrieks from Aunt Ruby had
us all rushing to her room. There was the python on her dressing-table, apparently
admiring himself in the mirror.
‘All the attention he’s been getting has probably made him conceited,’ said
Grandfather, picking up the python to the accompaniment of further shrieks from Aunt
Ruby. ‘Would you like to hold him for a minute, Ruby? He seems to have taken a fancy
to you.’
Aunt Ruby ran from the room and onto the veranda, where she was greeted with
whistles of derision from Popeye the parrot. Poor Aunt Ruby! She cut short her stay by

a week and returned to Lucknow, where she was a schoolteacher. She said she felt safer
in her school than she did in our house.
3
Having seen Grandfather handle the python with such ease and confidence, I decided I
would do likewise. So the next time I saw the snake climbing the ladder to the roof, I
climbed up alongside him. He stopped, and I stopped too. I put out my hand, and he slid
over my arm and up to my shoulder. As I did not want him coiling round my neck, I
gripped him with both hands and carried him down to the garden. He didn’t seem to
mind.
The snake felt rather cold and slippery and at first he gave me goose pimples. But I
soon got used to him, and he must have liked the way I handled him, because when I set
him down he wanted to climb up my leg. As I had other things to do, I dropped him in a
large empty basket that had been left out in the garden. He stared out at me with
unblinking, expressionless eyes. There was no way of knowing what he was thinking, if
indeed he thought at all.
I went off for a bicycle ride, and when I returned, I found Grandmother picking
guavas and dropping them into the basket. The python must have gone elsewhere.
When the basket was full, Grandmother said, ‘Will you take these over to Major
Malik?’ It’s his birthday and I want to give him a nice surprise.’
I fixed the basket on the carrier of my cycle and pedalled off to Major Malik’s house
at the end of the road. The major met me on the steps of his house.
‘And what has your kind granny sent me today, Ranji?’ he asked.
‘A surprise for your birthday, sir,’ I said, and put the basket down in front of him.
The python, who had been buried beneath all the guavas, chose this moment to wake
up and stand straight up to a height of several feet. Guavas tumbled all over the place.
The major uttered an oath and dashed indoors.
I pushed the python back into the basket, picked it up, mounted the bicycle, and rode
out of the gate in record time. And it was as well that I did so, because Major Malik
came charging out of the house armed with a double-barrelled shotgun, which he was
waving all over the place.
‘Did you deliver the guavas?’ asked Grandmother when I got back.
‘I delivered them,’ I said truthfully.
‘And was he pleased?’
‘He’s going to write and thank you,’ I said.
And he did.
‘Thank you for the lovely surprise,’ he wrote, ‘Obviously you could not have
known that my doctor had advised me against any undue excitement. My bloodpressure has been rather high. The sight of your grandson does not improve it. All

the same,it’s the thought that matters and I take it all in good humour…’
‘What a strange letter,’ said Grandmother. ‘He must be ill, poor man. Are guavas
bad for blood pressure?’
‘Not by themselves, they aren’t,’ said Grandfather, who had an inkling of what had
happened. ‘But together with other things they can be a bit upsetting.’
4
Just when all of us, including Grandmother, were getting used to having the python
about the house and grounds, it was decided that we would be going to Lucknow for a
few months.
Lucknow was a large city, about three hundred miles from Dehra. Aunt Ruby lived
and worked there. We would be staying with her, and so of course we couldn’t take any
pythons, monkeys or other unusual pets with us.
‘What about Popeye?’ I asked.
‘Popeye isn’t a pet,’ said Grandmother. ‘He’s one of us. He comes too.’
And so the Dehra railway platform was thrown into confusion by the shrieks and
whistles of our parrot, who could imitate both the guard’s whistle and the whistle of a
train. People dashed into their compartments, thinking the train was about to leave, only
to realise that the guard hadn’t blown his whistle after all. When they got down, Popeye
would let out another shrill whistle, which sent everyone rushing for the train again.
This happened several times until the guard actually blew his whistle. Then nobody
bothered to get on, and several passengers were left behind.
‘Can’t you gag that parrot?’ asked Grandfather, as the train moved out of the station
and picked up speed.
‘I’ll do nothing of the sort,’ said Grandmother. ‘I’ve bought a ticket for him, and he’s
entitled to enjoy the journey as much as anyone.’
Whenever we stopped at a station, Popeye objected to fruit-sellers and other people
poking their heads in through the windows. Before the journey was over, he had nipped
two fingers and a nose, and tweaked a ticket-inspector’s ear.
It was to be a night journey, and presently Grandmother covered herself with a
blanket and stretched out on the berth. ‘It’s been a tiring day. I think I’ll go to sleep,’ she
said.
‘Aren’t we going to eat anything?’ I asked.
‘I’m not hungry – I had something before we left the house. You two help yourselves
from the picnic hamper.’
Grandmother dozed off, and even Popeye started nodding, lulled to sleep by the
clackety-clack of the wheels and the steady puffing of the steam-engine.
‘Well, I’m hungry,’ I said. ‘What did Granny make for us?’
‘Stuffed samosas, omelettes, and tandoori chicken. It’s all in the hamper under the

berth.
I tugged at the cane box and dragged it into the middle of the compartment. The
straps were loosely tied. No sooner had I undone them than the lid flew open, and I let
out a gasp of surprise.
In the hamper was a python, curled up contentedly. There was no sign of our dinner.
‘It’s a python,’ I said. ‘And it’s finished all our dinner.’
‘Nonsense,’ said Grandfather, joining me near the hamper. ‘Pythons won’t eat
omelette and samosas. They like their food alive! Why, this isn’t our hamper. The one
with our food in it must have been left behind! Wasn’t it Major Malik who helped us
with our luggage? I think he’s got his own back on us by changing the hamper!’
Grandfather snapped the hamper shut and pushed it back beneath the berth.
‘Don’t let Grandmother see him,’ he said. ‘She might think we brought him along on
purpose.’
‘Well, I’m hungry,’ I complained.
‘Wait till we get to the next station, then we can buy some pakoras. Meanwhile, try
some of Popeye’s green chillies.’
‘No thanks,’ I said. ‘You have them, Grandad.’
And Grandfather, who could eat chillies plain, popped a couple into his mouth and
munched away contentedly.

A little after midnight there was a great clamour at the end of the corridor. Popeye
made complaining squawks, and Grandfather and I got up to see what was wrong.
Suddenly there were cries of ‘Snake, snake!’
I looked under the berth. The hamper was open.
‘The python’s out,’ I said, and Grandfather dashed out of the compartment in his
pyjamas. I was close behind.
About a dozen passengers were bunched together outside the washroom.
‘Anything wrong?’ asked Grandfather casually.
‘We can’t get into the toilet,’ said someone. ‘There’s a huge snake inside.’
‘Let me take a look,’ said Grandfather. ‘I know all about snakes.’
The passengers made way, and Grandfather and I entered the washroom together, but
there was no sign of the python.
‘He must have got out through the ventilator,’ said Grandfather. ‘By now he’ll be in
another compartment!’ Emerging from the washroom, he told the assembled passengers
‘It’s gone! Nothing to worry about. Just a harmless young python.’
When we got back to our compartment, Grandmother was sitting up on her berth.
‘I knew you’d do something foolish behind my back,’ she scolded. ‘You told me
you’d left that creature behind, and all the time it was with us on the train.’
Grandfather tried to explain that we had nothing to do with it, that this python had

been smuggled onto the train by Major Malik, but Grandmother was unconvinced.
‘Anyway, it’s gone,’ said Grandfather. ‘It must have fallen out of the washroom
window. We’re over a hundred miles from Dehra, so you’ll never see it again.’
Even as he spoke, the train slowed down and lurched to a grinding halt.
‘No station here,’ said Grandfather, putting his head out of the window.
Someone came rushing along the embankment, waving his arms and shouting.
‘I do believe it’s the stoker,’ said Grandfather. ‘I’d better go and see what’s wrong.’
‘I’m coming too,’ I said, and together we hurried along the length of the stationary
train until we reached the engine.
‘What’s up?’ called Grandfather. ‘Anything I can do to help? I know all about
engines.’
But the engine-driver was speechless. And who could blame him? The python had
curled itself about his legs, and the driver was too petrified to move.
‘Just leave it to us,’ said Grandfather, and, dragging the python off the driver, he
dumped the snake in my arms. The engine-driver sank down on the floor, pale and
trembling.
‘I think I’d better driver the engine,’ said Grandfather. ‘We don’t want to be late
getting into Lucknow. Your aunt will be expecting us!’ And before the astonished driver
could protest, Grandfather had released the brakes and set the engine in motion.
‘We’ve left the stoker behind,’ I said.
‘Never mind. You can shovel the coal.’
Only too glad to help Grandfather drive an engine, I dropped the python in the
driver’s lap and started shovelling coal. The engine picked up speed and we were soon
rushing through the darkness, sparks flying skywards and the steam-whistle shrieking
almost with pause.
‘You’re going too fast!’ cried the driver.
‘Making up for lost time,’ said Grandfather. ‘Why did the stoker run away?’
‘He went for the guard. You’ve left them both behind!’
5
Early next morning the train steamed safely into Lucknow. Explanations were in order,
but as the Lucknow station-master was an old friend of Grandfather, all was well. We
had arrived twenty minutes early, and while Grandfather went off to have a cup of tea
with the engine-driver and the station-master, I returned the python to the hamper and
helped Grandmother with the luggage. Popeye stayed perched on Grandmother’s
shoulder, eyeing the busy platform with deep distrust. He was the first to see Aunt Ruby
striding down the platform, and let out a warning whistle.
Aunt Ruby, a lover of good food, immediately spotted the picnic hamper, picked it
up and said, ‘It’s quite heavy. You must have kept something for me! I’ll carry it out to

the taxi.’
‘We hardly ate anything,’ I said.
‘It seems ages since I tasted something cooked by your granny.’ And after that there
was no getting the hamper away from Aunt Ruby.
Glancing at it, I thought I saw the lid bulging, but I had tied it down quite firmly this
time and there was little likelihood of its suddenly bursting open.
Grandfather joined us outside the station and we were soon settled inside the taxi.
Aunt Ruby gave instructions to the driver and we shot off in a cloud of dust.
‘I’m dying to see what’s in the hamper,’ said Aunt Ruby. ‘Can’t I take just a little
peek?’
‘Not now,’ said Grandfather. ‘First let’s enjoy the breakfast you’ve got waiting for
us.’
Popeye, perched proudly on Grandmother’s shoulder, kept one suspicious eye on the
quivering hamper.
When we got to Aunt Ruby’s house, we found breakfast laid out on the dining-table.
‘It isn’t much,’ said Aunt Ruby. ‘But we’ll supplement it with what you’ve brought
in the hamper.’
Placing the hamper on the table, she lifted the lid and peered inside. And promptly
fainted.
Grandfather picked up the python, took it into the garden, and draped it over a
branch of a pomegranate tree.
When Aunt Ruby recovered, she insisted that she had seen a huge snake in the picnic
hamper. We showed her the empty basket.
‘You’re seeing things,’ said Grandfather. ‘You’ve been working too hard.’
‘Teaching is a very tiring job,’ I said solemnly.
Grandmother said nothing. But Popeye broke into loud squawks and whistles, and
soon everyone, including a slightly hysterical Aunt Ruby, was doubled up with laughter.
But the snake must have tired of the joke because we never saw it again!

Those Three Bears
ost Himalayan villages lie in the valleys, where there are small streams, some
farmland, and protection from the biting winds that come through the mountain
passes in winter. The houses are usually made of large stones and have sloping slate
roofs so the heavy monsoon rain can run off easily. During the sunny autumn months, the
roofs are often covered with pumpkins, left there to ripen in the sun.
One October night, when I was sleeping at a friend’s house in a village in these
hills, I was awakened by a rumbling and thumping on the roof. I woke my friend and
asked him what was happening.
‘It’s only a bear,’ he said.
‘Is it trying to get in?’
‘No. It’s after the pumpkins.’
A little later, when we looked out of a window, we saw a black bear making off
through a field, leaving a trail of half-eaten pumpkins.
In winter, when snow covers the higher ranges, the Himalayan bears come to lower
altitudes in search of food. Sometimes they forage in fields and because they are
shortsighted and suspicious of anything that moves, they can be dangerous. But, like
most wild animals, they avoid humans as much as possible.
Village folk always advice me to run downhill if chased by a bear. They say bears
find it easier to run uphill than down. I am yet to be chased by a bear, and will happily
skip the experience. But I have seen a few of these mountain bears in India, and they are
always fascinating to watch.
Himalayan bears enjoy pumpkins, corn, plums, and apricots. Once, while I was
sitting in an oak tree hoping to see a pair of pine martens that lived nearby, I heard the
whining grumble of a bear, and presently a small bear ambled into the clearing beneath
the tree.
He was little more than a cub, and I was not alarmed. I sat very still, waiting to see
what he would do.
He put his nose to the ground and sniffed his way along until he came to a large
anthill. Here he began huffing and puffing, blowing rapidly in and out of his nostrils, so
that the dust from the anthill flew in all directions. But the anthill had been deserted,
and so, grumbling, the bear made his way up a nearby plum tree. Soon he was perched
high in the branches. It was then that he saw me.
The bear at once scrambled several feet higher up the tree and lay flat on a branch.
Since it wasn’t a very big branch, there was a lot of bear showing on either side. He
tucked his head behind another branch. He could no longer see me, so he apparently

was satisfied that he was hidden, although he couldn’t help grumbling.
Like all bears, this one was full of curiosity. So, slowly, inch by inch, his black
snout appeared over the edge of the branch. As soon as he saw me, he drew his head
back and hid his face.
He did this several times. I waited until he wasn’t looking, then moved some way
down my tree. When the bear looked over and saw that I was missing, he was so
pleased that he stretched right across to another branch and helped himself to a plum. I
couldn’t help bursting into laughter.
The startled young bear tumbled out of the tree, dropped through the branches some
fifteen feet, and landed with a thump in a pile of dried leaves. He was unhurt, but fled
from the clearing, grunting and squealing all the way.
Another time, my friend Prem told me, a bear had been active in his cornfield. We
took up a post at night in an old cattle shed, which gave a clear view of the moonlit
field.
A little after midnight, a female bear came down to the edge of the field. She seemed
to sense that we had been about. She was hungry, however. So, after standing on her
hind legs and peering around to make sure the field was empty, she came cautiously out
of the forest.
Her attention was soon distracted by some Tibetan prayer flags, which had been
strung between two trees. She gave a grunt of disapproval and began to back away, but
the fluttering of the flags was a puzzle that she wanted to solve. So she stopped and
watched them.
Soon the bear advanced to within a few feet of the flags, examining them from
various angles. Then, seeing that they posed no danger, she went right up to the flags
and pulled them down. Grunting with apparent satisfaction, she moved into the field of
corn.
Prem had decided that he didn’t want to lose any more of his crop, so he started
shouting. His children woke up and soon came running from the house, banging on
empty kerosene tins.
Deprived of her dinner, the bear made off in a bad temper. She ran downhill at a
good speed, and I was glad that I was not in her way.
Uphill or downhill, an angry bear is best given a very wide path.

The Coral Tree
he night had been hot, the rain frequent, and I had been sleeping on the verandah
instead of in the house. I was in my twenties, had begun to earn a living and felt I
had certain responsibilities.
In a short time, a tonga would take me to the railway station, and from there a train
would take me to Bombay, and then a ship would take me to England. There would be
work, interviews, a job, a different kind of life, so many things that this small bungalow
of my grandfather would be remembered fitfully, in rare moments of reflection.
When I awoke on the veranda, I saw a grey morning, smelt the rain on the red earth
and remembered that I had to go away. A girl was standing on the veranda porch,
looking at me very seriously. When I saw her, I sat up in bed with a start.
She was a small dark girl, her eyes big and black, her pigtails tied up in a bright red
ribbon, and she was fresh and clean like the rain and the red earth.
She stood looking at me and was very serious.
‘Hullo,’ I said, smiling and trying to put her at ease. But the girl was business-like
and acknowledged my greeting with a brief nod.
‘Can I do anything for you?’ I asked, stretching my limbs. ‘Do you stay nearby?’
With great assurance she said, ‘Yes, but I can stay on my own.’
‘You’re like me,’ I said, and for a while, forgot about being an old man of twenty. ‘I
like to be on my own but I’m going away today.’
‘Oh,’ she said, a little breathlessly.
‘Would you care to go to England?’
‘I want to go everywhere,’ she said. ‘To America and Africa and Japan and
Honolulu.’
‘Maybe you will,’ I said. ‘I’m going everywhere, and no one can stop me… But
what is it you want, what did you come for?’
‘I want some flowers but I can’t reach them.’ She waved her hand towards the
garden, ‘That tree, see?’
The coral tree stood in front of the house surrounded by pools of water and broken,
fallen blossoms. The branches of the tree were thick with scarlet, pea-shaped flowers.
‘All right, just let me get ready.’
The tree was easy to climb and I made myself comfortable on one of the lower
branches, smiling down at the serious upturned face of the girl.
‘I’ll throw them down to you,’ I said.
I bent a branch but the wood was young and green and I had to twist it several times

before it snapped.
‘I’m not sure I ought to do this,’ I said as I dropped the flowering branch to the girl.
‘Don’t worry,’ she said.
I felt a sudden nostalgic longing for childhood and an urge to remain behind in my
grandfather’s house with its tangled memories and ghosts of yesteryear. But I was the
only one left and what could I do except climb tamarind and jackfruit trees?
‘Have you many friends?’ I asked.
‘Oh yes.’
‘And who is the best?’
‘The cook. He lets me stay in the kitchen which is more interesting than the house.
And I like to watch him cooking. And he gives me things to eat and tells me stories…’
‘And who is your second best friend?’
She inclined her head to one side and thought very hard.
‘I’ll make you second best,’ she said.
I sprinkled coral blossoms on her head. ‘That’s very kind of you. I’m happy to be
second best.’
A tonga bell sounded at the gate and I looked out from the tree and said, ‘It’s come
for me. I have to go now.’
I climbed down.
‘Will you help me with my suitcases?’ I asked, as we walked together towards the
veranda. ‘There’s no one here to help me. I am the last to go. Not because I want to go
but because I have to.’
I sat down on the cot and packed a few last things in my suitcase. All the doors of
the house were locked. On my way to the station, I would leave the keys with the
caretaker. I had already given instructions to the agent to try and sell the house. There
was nothing more to be done. We walked in silence to the waiting tonga, thinking and
wondering about each other. The girl stood at the side of the path, on the damp earth,
looking at me.
‘Thank you,’ I said, ‘I hope I shall see you again.’
‘I’ll see you in London,’ she said. ‘Or America or Japan, I want to go everywhere.’
‘I’m sure you will,’ I said. ‘And perhaps, I’ll come back and we’ll meet again in this
garden. That would be nice, wouldn’t it?’
She nodded and smiled. We knew it was an important moment. The tonga driver
spoke to his pony and the carriage set off down the gravel path, rattling a little. The girl
and I waved to each other. In the girl’s hand was a spring of coral blossom. As she
waved, the blossoms fell apart and danced lightly in the breeze.
‘Goodbye!’ I called.
‘Goodbye!’ called the girl.
The ribbon had come loose from her pigtail and lay on the ground with the coral
blossoms.

And she was fresh and clean like the rain and the red earth.

The Thief’s Story
was still a thief when I met Romi. And though I was only fifteen years old, I was an
experienced and fairly successful hand. Romi was watching a wrestling match when I
approached him. He was about twenty-five and he looked easygoing, kind, and simple
enough for my purpose. I was sure I would be able to win the young man’s confidence.
‘You look a bit of a wrestler yourself,’ I said. There’s nothing like flattery to break
the ice!
‘So do you,’ he replied, which put me off for a moment because at that time I was
rather thin and bony.
‘Well,’ I said modestly, ‘I do wrestle a bit.’
‘What’s your name?’
‘Hari Singh,’ I lied. I took a new name every month, which kept me ahead of the
police and former employers.
After these formalities Romi confined himself to commenting on the wrestlers, who
were grunting, gasping, and heaving each other about. When he walked away, I
followed him casually.
‘Hello again,’ he said.
I gave him my most appealing smile. ‘I want to work for you,’ I said.
‘But I can’t pay you anything – not for some time, anyway.’
I thought that over for a minute. Perhaps I had misjudged my man. ‘Can you feed
me?’ I asked.
‘Can you cook?’
‘I can cook,’ I lied again.
‘If you can cook, then maybe I can feed you.’
He took me to his room over the Delhi Sweet Shop and told me I could sleep on the
balcony. But the meal I cooked that night must have been terrible because Romi gave it
to a stray dog and told me to be off.
But I just hung around, smiling in my most appealing way, and he couldn’t help
laughing.
Later, he said never mind, he’d teach me to cook. He also taught me to write my
name and said he would soon teach me to write whole sentences and to add figures. I
was grateful. I knew that once I could write like an educated person, there would be no
limit to what I could achieve.
It was quite pleasant working for Romi. I made tea in the morning and then took my
time buying the day’s supplies, usually making a profit of two or three rupees. I think he

knew I made a little money this way, but he didn’t seem to mind.
Romi made money by fits and starts. He would borrow one week, lend the next. He
kept worrying about his next cheque, but as soon as it arrived he would go out and
celebrate. He wrote for the Delhi and Bombay magazines: a strange way to make a
living.
One evening he came home with a small bundle of notes, saying he had just sold a
book to a publisher. That night I saw him put the money in an envelope and tuck it under
the mattress.
I had been working for Romi for almost a month and, apart from cheating on the
shopping, had not done anything big in my real line of work. I had every opportunity for
doing so. I could come and go as I pleased, and Romi was the most trusting person I
had ever met.
That was why it was so difficult to rob him. It was easy for me to rob a greedy man.
But robbing a nice man could be a problem. And if he doesn’t notice he’s being robbed,
then all the spice goes out of the undertaking!
Well, it’s time I got down to some real work, I told myself. If I don’t take the money,
he’ll only waste it on his so-called friends. After all, he doesn’t even give me a salary.
Romi was sleeping peacefully. A beam of moonlight reached over the balcony and
fell on his bed. I sat on the floor, considering the situation. If I took the money, I could
catch the 10:30 express to Lucknow. Slipping out of my blanket, I crept over to the bed.
My hand slid under the mattress, searching for the notes. When I found the packet, I
drew it out without a sound. Romi sighed in his sleep and turned on his side. Startled, I
moved quickly out of the room.
Once on the road, I began to run. I had the money stuffed into a vest pocket under my
shirt. When I’d gotten some distance from Romi’s place, I slowed to a walk and, taking
the envelope from my pocket, counted the money. Seven hundred rupees in fifties. I
could live like a prince for a week or two!
When I reached the station, I did not stop at the ticket office (I had never bought a
ticket in my life) but dashed straight onto the platform. The Lucknow Express was just
moving out. The train had still to pick up speed and I should have been able to jump
into one of the compartments, but I hesitated – for some reason I can’t explain – and I
lost the chance to get away.
When the train had gone, I found myself standing alone on the deserted platform. I
had no idea where to spend the night. I had no friends, believing that friends were more
trouble than help. And I did not want to arouse curiosity by staying at one of the small
hotels nearby. The only person I knew really well was the man I had robbed. Leaving
the station, I walked slowly through the bazaar.
In my short career, I had made a study of people’s faces after they had discovered
the loss of their valuables. The greedy showed panic; the rich showed anger; the poor,
resignation. But I knew that Romi’s face when he discovered the theft would show only

a touch of sadness – not for the loss of money, but for the loss of trust.
The night was chilly – November nights can be cold in northern India – and a
shower of rain added to my discomfort. I sat down in the shelter of the clock tower. A
few beggars and vagrants lay beside me, rolled up tight in their blankets. The clock
showed midnight. I felt for the notes; they were soaked through.
Romi’s money. In the morning, he would probably have given me five rupees to go
to the movies, but now I had it all: no more cooking meals, running to the bazaar, or
learning to write sentences.
Sentences! I had forgotten about them in the excitement of the theft. Writing complete
sentences, I knew, could one day bring me more than a few hundred rupees. It was a
simple matter to steal. But to be a really big man, a clever and respected man, was
something else. I should go back to Romi, I told myself, if only to learn to read and
write.
I hurried back to the room feeling very nervous, for it is much easier to steal
something than to return it undetected.
I opened the door quietly, then stood in the doorway in clouded moonlight. Romi
was still asleep. I crept to the head of the bed, and my hand came up with the packet of
notes. I felt his breath on my hand. I remained still for a few moments. Then my fingers
found the edge of the mattress, and I slipped the money beneath it.
I awoke late the next morning to find that Romi had already made the tea. He
stretched out a hand to me. There was a fifty-rupee note between his fingers. My heart
sank.
‘I made some money yesterday,’ he said. ‘Now I’ll be able to pay you regularly.’
My spirits rose. But when I took the note, I noticed that it was still wet from the
night’s rain. So he knew what I’d done. But neither his lips nor his eyes revealed
anything.
‘Today we’ll start writing sentences,’ he said.
I smiled at Romi in my most appealing way. And the smile came by itself, without
any effort.

When the Trees Walked
ne morning while I was sitting beside Grandfather on the veranda steps, I noticed
the tendril of a creeping vine trailing nearby. As we sat there in the soft sunshine
of a North Indian winter, I saw the tendril moving slowly towards Grandfather. Twenty
minutes later, it had crossed the step and was touching his feet.
There is probably a scientific explanation for the plant’s behaviour – something to
do with light and warmth perhaps – but I liked to think it moved across the steps simply
because it wanted to be near Grandfather. One always felt like drawing close to him.
Sometimes when I sat by myself beneath a tree, I would feel rather lonely but as soon as
Grandfather joined me, the garden became a happy place. Grandfather had served many
years in the Indian Forest Service and it was natural that he should know trees and like
them. On his retirement, he built a bungalow on the outskirts of Dehradun, planting trees
all around. Lime, mango, orange and guava, also eucalyptus, jacaranda, and Persian
lilacs. In the fertile Doon Valley, plants and trees grew tall and strong.
There were other trees in the compound before the house was built, including an old
peepul that had forced its way through the walls of an abandoned outhouse, knocking
the bricks down with its vigorous growth. Peepul trees are great show offs. Even when
there is no breeze, their broad-chested, slim-waisted leaves will spin like tops
determined to attract your attention and invite you into the shade. Grandmother had
wanted the peepul tree cut down but Grandfather had said, ‘Let it be, we can always
build another outhouse.’
Grandmother didn’t mind trees, but she preferred growing flowers and was
constantly ordering catalogues and seeds. Grandfather helped her out with the gardening
not because he was crazy about flower gardens but because he liked watching
butterflies and ‘there’s only one way to attract butterflies,’ he said, ‘and that is to grow
flowers for them.’
Grandfather wasn’t content with growing trees in our compound. During the rains, he
would walk into the jungle beyond the river-bed armed with cuttings and saplings
which he would plant in the forest.
‘But no one ever comes here!’ I had protested, the first time we did this. ‘Who’s
going to see them?’
‘See, we’re not planting them simply to improve the view,’ replied Grandfather.
‘We’re planting them for the forest and for the animals and birds who live here and
need more food and shelter.’
‘Of course, men need trees too,’ he added. ‘To keep the desert away, to attract rain,

to prevent the banks of rivers from being washed away, for fruit and flowers, leaf and
seed. Yes, for timber too. But men are cutting down trees without replacing them and if
we don’t plant a few trees ourselves, a time will come when the world will be one
great desert.’
The thought of a world without trees became a sort of nightmare to me and I helped
Grandfather in his tree-planting with greater enthusiasm. And while we went about our
work, he taught me a poem by George Morris:
Woodman, spare that tree!
Touch not a single bough!
In youth it sheltered me,
And I’ll protect it now.
‘One day the trees will move again,’ said Grandfather. ‘They’ve been standing still
for thousands of years but there was a time when they could walk about like people.
Then along came an interfering busybody who cast a spell over them, rooting them to
one place. But they’re always trying to move. See how they reach out with their arms!
And some of them, like the banyan tree with its travelling aerial roots, manage to get
quite far.’
We found an island, a small rocky island in a dry river-bed. It was one of those
river-beds so common in the foothills, which are completely dry in summer but flooded
during the monsoon rains. A small mango was growing on the island. ‘If a small tree
can grow here,’ said Grandfather, ‘so can others.’ As soon as the rains set in and while
rivers could still be crossed, we set out with a number of tamarind, laburnum, and coral
tree saplings and cuttings and spent the day planting them on the island.
The monsoon season was the time for rambling about. At every turn, there was
something new to see. Out of the earth and rock and leafless boughs, the magic touch of
the rains had brought life and greenness. You could see the broad-leaved vines
growing. Plants sprang up in the most unlikely of places. A peepul would take root in
the ceiling, a mango would sprout on the window-sill. We did not like to remove them
but they had to go if the house was to be kept from falling down.
‘If you want to live in a tree, that’s all right by me,’ said Grandmother crossly. ‘But I
like having a roof over my head and I’m not going to have my roof brought down by the
jungle.’
Then came the Second World War and I was sent away to a boarding school. During
the holidays, I went to live with my father in Delhi. Meanwhile, my grandparents sold
the house and went to England. Two or three years later, I too went to England and was
away from India for several years.
Some years later, I returned to Dehradun. After first visiting the old house – it hadn’t
changed much – I walked out of town towards the river-bed. It was February. As I

looked across the dry water-course, my eye was immediately caught by the spectacular
red blooms of the coral blossom. In contrast with the dry river-bed, the island was a
small green paradise. When I went up to the trees, I noticed that some squirrels were
living in them and a koel, a crow pheasant, challenged me with a mellow ‘who-are-you,
who-are-you’.
But the trees seemed to know me; they whispered among themselves and beckoned
me nearer. And looking around I noticed that other smaller trees, wild plants and
grasses had sprung up under their protection. Yes, the trees we had planted long ago had
multiplied. They were walking again. In one small corner of the world, Grandfather’s
dream had come true.

Goodbye, Miss Mackenzie
he Oaks, Holly Mount, The Parsonage, The Pines, Dumbarnie, Mackinnon’s Hall,
and Windermere. These are names of some of the old houses that still stand on the
outskirts of one of the larger Indian hill-stations. They were built over a hundred years
ago by British settlers who sought relief from the searing heat of the plains. A few fell
into decay and are now inhabited by wild cats, owls, goats, and the occasional muledriver. Others survive.
Among these old mansions stands a neat, white-washed cottage, Mulberry Lodge.
And in it lived an elderly British spinster named Miss Mackenzie. She was sprightly
and wore old-fashioned but well-preserved dresses. Once a week, she walked up to
town and bought butter, jam, soap and sometimes a bottle of eau-de-cologne.
Miss Mackenzie had lived there since her teens, before World War I. Her parents,
brother, and sister were all dead. She had no relatives in India, and lived on a small
pension and gift parcels sent by a childhood friend. She had few visitors – the local
padre, the postman, the milkman. Like other lonely old people, she kept a pet, a large
black cat with bright, yellow eyes.
In a small garden, she grew dahlias, chrysanthemums, gladioli and a few rare
orchids. She knew a great deal about wild flowers, trees, birds, and insects. She never
seriously studied them, but had an intimacy with all that grew and flourished around
her.
It was September, and the rains were nearly over. Miss Mackenzie’s African
marigolds were blooming. She hoped the coming winter wouldn’t be too severe
because she found it increasingly difficult to bear the cold. One day, as she was
puttering about in her garden, she saw a schoolboy plucking wild flowers on the slope
above the cottage. ‘What are you up to, young man?’ she called.
Alarmed, the boy tried to dash up the hillside, but slipped on pine needles and slid
down the slope into Miss Mackenzie’s nasturtium bed. Finding no escape, he gave a
bright smile and said, ‘Good morning, Miss.’
‘Good morning,’ said Miss Mackenzie severely. ‘Would you mind moving out of my
flower bed?’
The boy stepped gingerly over the nasturtiums, and looked at Miss Mackenzie with
appealing eyes.
‘You ought to be in school,’ she said. ‘What are you doing here?’
‘Picking flowers, Miss.’ He held up a bunch of ferns and wild flowers.
‘Oh,’ Miss Mackenzie was disarmed. It had been a long time since she had seen a

boy taking an interest in flowers.
‘Do you like flowers?’ she asked.
‘Yes, Miss. I’m going to be a botan…a botanitist.’
‘You mean a botanist?’
‘Yes, Miss.’
‘That’s unusual. Do you know the names of these flowers?’
‘This is a buttercup,’ he said, showing her a small golden flower. ‘But I don’t know
what this is,’ he said, holding out a pale, pink flower with a heart-shaped leaf.
‘It’s a wild begonia,’ said Miss Mackenzie. ‘And that purple stuff is salvia. Do you
have any books on flowers?’
‘No, Miss.’
‘Come in and I’ll show you one.’
She led the boy into a small front room crowded with furniture, books, vases, and
jam jars. He sat awkwardly on the edge of the chair. The cat jumped immediately on to
his knees and settled down, purring softly.
‘What’s your name?’ asked Miss Mackenzie, as she rummaged through her books.
‘Anil, Miss.’
‘And where do you live?’
‘When school closes, I go to Delhi. My father has a business there.’
‘Oh, and what’s that?’
‘Bulbs, Miss.’
‘Flower bulbs?’
‘No, electric bulbs.’
‘Ah, here we are!’ she said taking a heavy tome from the shelf. ‘Flora Himaliensis,
published in 1892, and probably the only copy in India. This is a valuable book, Anil.
No other naturalist has recorded as many wild Himalayan flowers. But there are still
many plants unknown to the botanists who spend all their time at microscopes instead
of in the mountains. Perhaps you’ll do something about that one day.’
‘Yes, Miss.’
She lit the stove and put the kettle on for tea. And then the old English lady and the
small Indian boy sat side by side, absorbed in the book. Miss Mackenzie pointed out
many flowers that grew around the hill-station, while the boy made notes of their names
and seasons.
‘May I come again?’ asked Anil, when finally he rose to go.
‘If you like,’ said Miss Mackenzie. ‘But not during school hours. You mustn’t miss
your classes.’
After that, Anil visited Miss Mackenzie about once a week, and nearly always
brought a wild flower for her to identify. She looked forward to the boy’s visits.
Sometimes when more than a week passed and he didn’t come, she would grumble at
the cat.

By the middle of October, with only a fortnight left before school closed, snow fell
on the distant mountains. One peak stood high above the others, a white pinnacle againt
an azure sky. When the sun set, the peak turned from orange to pink to red.
‘How high is that mountain?’ asked Anil.
‘It must be over 15,000 feet,’ said Miss Mackenzie. ‘I always wanted to go there,
but there is no proper road. On the lower slopes, there’ll be flowers that you don’t get
here: blue gentian, purple columbine.’
The day before school closed, Anil came to say goodbye. As he was about to leave,
Miss Mackenzie thrust the Flora Himaliensis into his hands. ‘It’s a gift,’ she said.
‘But I’ll be back next year, and I’ll be able to look at it then,’ he protested. ‘Besides,
it’s so valuable!’
‘That’s why I’m giving it to you. Otherwise, it will fall into the hands of the junk
dealers.’
‘But, Miss…’
‘Don’t argue.’
The boy tucked the book under his arm, stood at attention, and said, ‘Goodbye, Miss
Mackenzie.’ It was the first time he had spoken her name.
Strong winds soon brought rain and sleet, killing the flowers in the garden. The cat
stayed indoors, curled up at the foot of the bed. Miss Mackenzie wrapped herself in old
shawls and mufflers, but still felt cold. Her fingers grew so stiff that it took almost an
hour to open a can of baked beans. Then it snowed, and for several days the milkman
did not come.
Tired, she spent most of her time in bed. It was the warmest place. She kept a hotwater bottle against her back, and the cat kept her feet warm. She dreamed of spring
and summer. In three months, the primroses would be out, and Anil would return.
One night the hot-water bottle burst, soaking the bed. The sun didn’t shine for
several days, and the blankets remained damp. Miss Mackenzie caught a chill and had
to keep to her cold, uncomfortable bed.
A strong wind sprang up one night and blew the bedroom window open. Miss
Mackenzie was too weak to get up and close it. The wind swept the rain and sleet into
the room. The cat snuggled close to its mistress’s body. Towards morning, the body lost
its warmth, and the cat left the bed and started scratching about on the floor.
As sunlight streamed through the window, the milkman arrived. He poured some
milk into the saucer on the doorstep, and the cat jumped down from the window-sill.
The milkman called out a greeting to Miss Mackenzie. There was no answer.
Knowing she was always up before sunrise, he poked his head in the open window and
called again.
Miss Mackenzie did not answer. She had gone to the mountain, where the blue
gentian and purple columbine grow.

Pret in the House
t was Grandmother who decided that we must move to another house. And it was all
because of a pret, a mischievous ghost, who had been making life intolerable for
everyone.
In India, prets usually live in peepul trees, and that’s where our Pret first had his
abode – in the branches of an old peepul which had grown through the compound wall
and had spread into the garden, on our side, and over the road, on the other side.
For many years, the Pret had lived there quite happily, without bothering anyone in
the house. I suppose the traffic on the road had kept him fully occupied. Sometimes,
when a tonga was passing, he would frighten the pony and, as a result, the little ponycart would go reeling off the road. Occasionally he would get into the engine of a car or
bus, which would soon afterwards have a breakdown. And he liked to knock the solatopis off the heads of sahibs, who would curse and wonder how a breeze had sprung up
so suddenly, only to die down again just as quickly. Although the Pret could make
himself felt, and sometimes heard, he was invisible to the human eye.
At night, people avoided walking beneath the peepul tree. It was said that if you
yawned beneath the tree, the Pret would jump down your throat and ruin your digestion.
Grandmother’s tailor, Jaspal, who never had anything ready on time, blamed the Pret
for all his troubles. Once, when yawning, Jaspal had forgotten to snap his fingers in
front of his mouth – always mandatory when yawning beneath peepul trees – and the
Pret had got in without any difficulty. Since then, Jaspal had always been suffering from
tummy upsets.
But it had left our family alone until, one day, the peepul tree had been cut down.
It was nobody’s fault except, of course, that Grandfather had given the Public Works
Department permission to cut the tree which had been standing on our land. They
wanted to widen the road, and the tree and a bit of wall were in the way; so both had to
go. In any case, not even a ghost can prevail against the PWD. But hardly a day had
passed when we discovered that the Pret, deprived of his tree, had decided to take up
residence in the bungalow. And since a good Pret must be bad in order to justify his
existence, he was soon up to all sorts of mischief in the house.
He began by hiding Grandmother’s spectacles whenever she took them off.
‘I’m sure I put them down on the dressing-table,’ she grumbled.
A little later they were found balanced precariously on the snout of a wild boar,
whose stuffed and mounted head adorned the veranda wall. Being the only boy in the
house, I was at first blamed for this prank; but a day or two later, when the spectacles

disappeared again only to be discovered dangling from the wires of the parrot’s cage, it
was agreed that some other agency was at work.
Grandfather was the next to be troubled. He went into the garden one morning to find
all his prized sweet-peas snipped off and lying on the ground.
Uncle Ken was the next to suffer. He was a heavy sleeper, and once he’d gone to
bed, he hated being woken up. So when he came to the breakfast table looking blearyeyed and miserable, we asked him if he wasn’t feeling all right.
‘I couldn’t sleep a wink last night,’ he complained. ‘Every time I was about to fall
asleep, the bedclothes would be pulled off the bed. I had to get up at least a dozen times
to pick them off the floor.’ He stared balefully at me. ‘Where were you sleeping last
night, young man?’
I had an alibi. ‘In Grandfather’s room,’ I said.
‘That’s right,’ said Grandfather. ‘And I’m a light sleeper. I’d have woken up if he’d
been sleep-walking.’
‘It’s that ghost from the peepul tree,’ said Grandmother.
‘It has moved into the house. First my spectacles, then the sweet-peas, and now
Ken’s bedclothes! What will it be up to next? I wonder!’
We did not have to wonder for long. There followed a series of disasters. Vases fell
off tables, pictures came down the walls. Parrot feathers turned up in the teapot while
the parrot himself let out indignant squawks in the middle of the night. Uncle Ken found
a crow’s nest in his bed, and on tossing it out of the window was attacked by two
crows.
When Aunt Minnie came to stay, things got worse. The Pret seemed to take an
immediate dislike to Aunt Minnie. She was a nervous, easily excitable person, just the
right sort of prey for a spiteful ghost. Somehow her toothpaste got switched with a tube
of Grandfather’s shaving-cream, and when she appeared in the sitting-room, foaming at
the mouth, we ran for our lives. Uncle Ken was shouting that she’d got rabies.
Two days later Aunt Minnie complained that she had been hit on the nose by a
grapefruit, which had of its own accord taken a leap from the pantry shelf and hurtled
across the room straight at her. A bruised and swollen nose testified to the attack. Aunt
Minnie swore that life had been more peaceful in Upper Burma.
‘We’ll have to leave this house,’ declared Grandmother.
‘If we stay here much longer, both Ken and Minnie will have nervous breakdowns.’
‘I thought Aunt Minnie broke down long ago,’ I said.
‘None of your cheek!’ snapped Aunt Minnie.
‘Anyway, I agree about changing the house,’ I said breezily. ‘I can’t even do my
homework. The ink-bottle is always empty.’
‘There was ink in the soup last night.’ That came from Grandfather.
And so, a few days and several disasters later, we began moving to a new house.
Two bullock-carts laden with furniture and heavy luggage were sent ahead. The roof

of the old car was piled high with bags and kitchen utensils. Everyone squeezed into the
car, and Grandfather took the driver’s seat.
We were barely out of the gate when we heard a peculiar sound, as if someone was
chuckling and talking to himself on the roof of the car.
‘Is the parrot out there on the luggage-rack?’ the query came from Grandfather.
‘No, he’s in the cage on one of the bullock-carts,’ said Grandmother.
Grandfather stopped the car, got out, and took a look at the roof.
‘Nothing up there,’ he said, getting in again and starting the engine. ‘I’m sure I heard
the parrot talking.’
Grandfather had driven some way up the road when the chuckling started again,
followed by a squeaky little voice.
We all heard it. It was the Pret talking to itself.
‘Let’s go, let’s go!’ it squeaked gleefully. ‘A new house. I can’t wait to see it. What
fun we’re going to have!’

The Overcoat
t was clear frosty weather, and as the moon came up over the Himalayan peaks, I could
see that patches of snow still lay on the roads of the hill-station. I would have been
quite happy in bed, with a book and a hot-water bottle at my side, but I’d promised the
Kapadias that I’d go to their party, and I felt it would be churlish of me to stay away. I
put on two sweaters, an old football scarf, and an overcoat, and set off down the
moonlit road.
It was a walk of just over a mile to the Kapadias’ house, and I had covered about
half the distance when I saw a girl standing in the middle of the road.
She must have been sixteen or seventeen. She looked rather old-fashioned – long
hair, hanging to her waist, and a flummoxy sequined dress, pink and lavender, that
reminded me of the photos in my grandmother’s family album. When I went closer, I
noticed that she had lovely eyes and a winning smile.
‘Good evening,’ I said. ‘It’s a cold night to be out.’
‘Are you going to the party?’ she asked.
‘That’s right. And I can see from your lovely dress that you’re going too. Come
along, we’re nearly there.’
She fell into step beside me and we soon saw lights from the Kapadias’ house
shining brightly through the deodars. The girl told me her name was Julie. I hadn’t seen
her before, but I’d only been in the hill-station a few months.
There was quite a crowd at the party, and no one seemed to know Julie. Everyone
thought she was a friend of mine. I did not deny it. Obviously she was someone who
was feeling lonely and wanted to be friendly with people. And she was certainly
enjoying herself. I did not see her do much eating or drinking, but she flitted about from
one group to another, talking, listening, laughing; and when the music began, she was
dancing almost continuously, alone or with partners, it didn’t matter which, she was
completely wrapped up in the music.
It was almost midnight when I got up to go. I had drunk a fair amount of punch, and I
was ready for bed. As I was saying goodnight to my hosts and wishing everyone a
merry Christmas, Julie slipped her arm into mine and said she’d be going home too.
When we were outside, I said, ‘Where do you live, Julie?’
‘At Wolfsburn,’ she said. ‘Right at the top of the hill.’
‘There’s a cold wind,’ I said. ‘And although your dress is beautiful, it doesn’t look
very warm. Here, you’d better wear my overcoat. I’ve plenty of protection.’
She did not protest, and allowed me to slip my overcoat over her shoulders. Then

we started out on the walk home. But I did not have to escort her all the way. At about
the spot where we had met, she said, ‘There’s a short cut from here. I’ll just scramble
up the hillside.’
‘Do you know it well?’ I asked. ‘It’s a very narrow path.’
‘Oh, I know every stone on the path. I use it all the time. And besides, it’s a really
bright night.’
‘Well, keep the coat on,’ I said. ‘I can collect it tomorrow.’
She hesitated for a moment, then smiled and nodded. She then disappeared up the
hill, and I went home alone.
The next day I walked up to Wolfsburn. I crossed a little brook, from which the
house had probably got its name, and entered an open iron gate. But of the house itself,
little remained. Just a roofless ruin, a pile of stones, a shattered chimney, a few Doric
pillars where a veranda had once stood.
Had Julie played a joke on me? Or had I found the wrong house?
I walked around the hill, to the mission house where the Taylors lived and asked old
Mrs Taylor if she knew a girl called Julie.
‘No, I don’t think so,’ she said. ‘Where does she live?’
‘At Wolfsburn, I was told. But the house is just a ruin.’
‘Nobody has lived at Wolfsburn for over forty years. The Mackinnons lived there.
One of the old families who settled here. But when their girl died…’ She stopped and
gave me a queer look. ‘I think her name was Julie…Anyway, when she died, they sold
the house and went away. No one ever lived in it again, and it fell into decay. But it
couldn’t be the same Julie you’re looking for. She died of consumption – there wasn’t
much you could do about it in those days. Her grave is in the cemetery, just down the
road.’
I thanked Mrs Taylor and walked slowly down the road to the cemetery; not really
wanting to know any more, but propelled forward almost against my will.
It was a small cemetery under the deodars. You could see the eternal snows of the
Himalayas standing out against the pristine blue of the sky. Here lay the bones of
forgotten empire-builders – soldiers, merchants, adventurers, their wives and children.
It did not take me long to find Julie’s grave. It had a simple headstone with her name
clearly outlined on it:
Julie Mackinnon
1923-39
‘With us one moment,
Taken the next,
Gone to her Maker,
Gone to her rest.’

Although many monsoons had swept across the cemetery wearing down the stones,
they had not touched this little tombstone.
I was turning to leave when I caught a glimpse of something familiar behind the
headstone. I walked round to where it lay.
Neatly folded on the grass was my overcoat.
No thank-you note. But something soft and invisible brushed against my cheek, and I
knew someone was trying to thank me.

The Tunnel
t was almost noon, and the jungle was very still, very silent. Heat waves shimmered
along the railway embankment where it cut a path through the tall evergreen trees. The
railway lines were two straight black serpents disappearing into the tunnel in the
hillside.
Suraj stood near the cutting, waiting for the mid-day train. It wasn’t a station, and he
wasn’t catching a train. He was waiting so that he could watch the steam-engine come
roaring out of the tunnel.
He had cycled out of the town and taken the jungle path until he had come to a small
village. He had left the cycle there, and walked over a low, scrub-covered hill and
down to the tunnel exit.
Now he looked up. He had heard, in the distance, the shrill whistle of the engine. He
couldn’t see anything, because the train was approaching from the other side of the hill;
but presently a sound, like distant thunder, issued from the tunnel, and he knew the train
was coming through.
A second or two later, the steam-engine shot out of the tunnel, snorting and puffing
like some green, black and gold dragon, some beautiful monster out of Suraj’s dreams.
Showering sparks left and right, it roared a challenge to the jungle.
Instinctively, Suraj stepped back a few paces. And then the train had gone, leaving
only a plume of smoke to drift lazily over tall shisham trees.
The jungle was still again. No one moved. Suraj turned from his contemplation of
the drifting smoke and began walking along the embankment towards the tunnel.
The tunnel grew darker as he walked further into it. When he had gone about twenty
yards, it became pitch black. Suraj had to turn and look back at the opening to reassure
himself that there was still daylight outside. Ahead of him, the tunnel’s other opening
was just a small round circle of light.
The tunnel was still full of smoke from the train, but it would be several hours
before another train came through. Till then, it belonged to the jungle again.
Suraj didn’t stop, because there was nothing to do in the tunnel and nothing to see.
He had simply wanted to walk through, so that he would know what the inside of a
tunnel was really like. The walls were damp and sticky. A bat flew past. A lizard
scuttled between the lines.
Coming straight from the darkness into the light, Suraj was dazzled by the sudden
glare. He put a hand up to shade his eyes and looked up at the tree-covered hillside. He
thought he saw something moving between the trees.

It was just a flash of orange and gold, and a long swishing tail. It was there between
the trees for a second or two, and then it was gone.
About fifty feet from the entrance to the tunnel stood the watchman’s hut. Marigolds
grew in front of the hut, and at the back there was a small vegetable patch. It was the
watchman’s duty to inspect the tunnel and keep it clear of obstacles. Every day, before
the train came through, he would walk the length of the tunnel. If all was well, he would
return to his hut and take a nap. If something was wrong, he would walk back up the
line and wave a red flag and the engine-driver would slow down. At night, the
watchman lit an oil lamp and made a similar inspection of the tunnel. Of course, he
could not stop the train if there was a porcupine on the line. But if there was any danger
to the train, he’d go back up the line and wave his lamp to the approaching engine. If all
was well, he’d hang his lamp at the door of the hut and go to sleep.
He was just settling down on his cot for an afternoon nap when he saw the boy
emerge from the tunnel. He waited until Suraj was only a few feet away and then said:
‘Welcome, welcome, I don’t often have visitors. Sit down for a while, and tell me why
you were inspecting my tunnel.’
‘Is it your tunnel?’ asked Suraj.
‘It is,’ said the watchman. ‘It is truly my tunnel, since no one else will have anything
to do with it. I have only lent it to the government.’
Suraj sat down on the edge of the cot.
‘I wanted to see the train come through,’ he said. ‘And then, when it had gone, I
thought I’d walk through the tunnel.’
‘And what did you find in it?’
‘Nothing. It was very dark. But when I came out, I thought I saw an animal – up on
the hill – but I’m not sure, it moved away very quickly.’
‘It was a leopard you saw,’ said the watchman. ‘My leopard.’
‘Do you own a leopard too?’
‘I do.’
‘And do you lend it to the government?’
‘I do not.’
‘Is it dangerous?’
‘No, it’s a leopard that minds its own business. It comes to this range for a few days
every month.’
‘Have you been here a long time?’ asked Suraj.
‘Many years. My name is Sunder Singh.’
‘My name’s Suraj.’
‘There’s one train during the day. And another during the night. Have you seen the
night mail come through the tunnel?’
‘No. At what time does it come?’
‘About nine o’clock, if it isn’t late. You could come and sit here with me, if you like.

And after it has gone, I’ll take you home.’
‘I shall ask my parents,’ said Suraj. ‘Will it be safe?’
‘Of course. It’s safer in the jungle than in the town. Nothing happens to me out here,
but last month when I went into the town, I was almost run over by a bus.’
Sunder Singh yawned and stretched himself out on the cot. ‘And now I’m going to
take a nap, my friend. It is too hot to be up and about in the afternoon.’
‘Everyone goes to sleep in the afternoon,’ complained Suraj. ‘My father lies down
as soon as he’s had his lunch.’
‘Well, the animals also rest in the heat of the day. It is only the tribe of boys who
cannot, or will not, rest.’
Sunder Singh placed a large banana-leaf over his face to keep away the flies, and
was soon snoring gently. Suraj stood up, looking up and down the railway tracks. Then
he began walking back to the village.
The following evening, towards dusk, as the flying foxes swooped silently out of the
trees, Suraj made his way to the watchman’s hut.
It had been a long hot day, but now the earth was cooling, and a light breeze was
moving through the trees. It carried with it a scent of mango blossoms, the promise of
rain.
Sunder Singh was waiting for Suraj. He had watered his small garden, and the
flowers looked cool and fresh. A kettle was boiling on a small oil-stove.
‘I’m making tea,’ he said. ‘There’s nothing like a glass of hot tea while waiting for a
train.’
They drank their tea, listening to the sharp notes of the tailorbird and the noisy
chatter of the seven-sisters. As the brief twilight faded, most of the birds fell silent.
Sunder Singh lit his oil-lamp and said it was time for him to inspect the tunnel. He
moved off towards the tunnel, while Suraj sat on the cot, sipping his tea. In the dark, the
trees seemed to move closer to him. And the night life of the forest was conveyed on the
breeze – the sharp call of a barking-deer, the cry of a fox, the quaint tonk-tonk of a
nightjar. There were some sounds that Suraj couldn’t recognise – sounds that came from
the trees, creakings and whisperings, as though the trees were coming alive, stretching
their limbs in the dark, shifting a little, reflexing their fingers.
Sunder Singh stood inside the tunnel, trimming his lamp. The night sounds were
familiar to him and he did not give them much thought; but something else – a padded
footfall, a rustle of dry leaves – made him stand alert for a few seconds, peering into
the darkness. Then, humming softly to himself, he returned to where Suraj was waiting.
Another ten minutes remained for the night mail to arrive.
As Sunder Singh sat down on the cot beside Suraj, a new sound reached both of
them quite distinctly – a rhythmic sawing sound, as if someone was cutting through the
branch of a tree.
‘What’s that?’ whispered Suraj.

‘It’s the leopard,’ said Sunder Singh.
‘I think it’s in the tunnel.’
‘The train will soon be here,’ reminded Suraj.
‘Yes, my friend. And if we don’t drive the leopard out of the tunnel, it will be run
over and killed. I can’t let that happen.’
‘But won’t it attack us if we try to drive it out?’ asked Suraj, beginning to share the
watchman’s concern.
‘Not this leopard. It knows me well. We have seen each other many times. It has a
weakness for goats and stray dogs, but it won’t harm us. Even so, I’ll take my axe with
me. You stay here, Suraj.’
‘No, I’m going with you. It’ll be better than sitting here alone in the dark!’
‘All right, but stay close behind me. And remember, there’s nothing to fear.’
Raising his lamp high, Sunder Singh advanced into the tunnel, shouting at the top of
his voice to try and scare away the animal. Suraj followed close behind, but he found
he was unable to do any shouting. His throat was quite dry.
They had gone just about twenty paces into the tunnel when the light from the lamp
fell upon the leopard. It was crouching between the tracks, only fifteen feet away from
them. It was not a very big leopard, but it looked lithe and sinewy. Baring its teeth and
snarling, it went down on its belly, tail twitching.
Suraj and Sunder Singh both shouted together. Their voices rang through the tunnel.
And the leopard, uncertain as to how many terrifying humans were there in the tunnel
with him, turned swiftly and disappeared into the darkness.
To make sure that it had gone, Sunder Singh and Suraj walked the length of the
tunnel. When they returned to the entrance, the rails were beginning to hum. They knew
the train was coming.
Suraj put his hand to the rails and felt its tremor. He heard the distant rumble of the
train. And then the engine came round the bend, hissing at them, scattering sparks into
the darkness, defying the jungle as it roared through the steep sides of the cutting. It
charged straight at the tunnel, and into it, thundering past Suraj like the beautiful dragon
of his dreams.
And when it had gone, the silence returned and the forest seemed to breathe, to live
again. Only the rails still trembled with the passing of the train.
And they trembled to the passing of the same train, almost a week later, when Suraj
and his father were both travelling in it.
Suraj’s father was scribbling in a notebook, doing his accounts. Suraj sat at an open
window staring out at the darkness. His father was going to Delhi on a business trip and
had decided to take the boy along. (‘I don’t know where he gets to, most of the time,’
he’d complained. ‘I think it’s time he learnt something about my business.’)
The night mail rushed through the forest with its hundreds of passengers. Tiny
flickering lights came and went, as they passed small villages on the fringe of the

jungle.
Suraj heard the rumble as the train passed over a small bridge. It was too dark to see
the hut near the cutting, but he knew they must be approaching the tunnel. He strained his
eyes looking out into the night; and then, just as the engine let out a shrill whistle, Suraj
saw the lamp.
He couldn’t see Sunder Singh, but he saw the lamp, and he knew that his friend was
out there.
The train went into the tunnel and out again; it left the jungle behind and thundered
across the endless plains; and Suraj stared out at the darkness, thinking of the lonely
cutting in the forest, and the watchman with the lamp who would always remain a
firefly for those travelling thousands, as he lit up the darkness for steam-engines and
leopards.

Wild Fruit
t was a long walk to school. Down the hill, through the rhododendron trees, across a
small stream, around a bare, brown hill, and then through the narrow little bazaar, past
fruit stalls piled high with oranges, guavas, bananas, and apples.
The boy’s gaze often lingered on those heaps of golden oranges – oranges grown in
the plains, now challenging the pale winter sunshine in the hills. His nose twitched at
the sharp smell of melons in summer; his fingers would sometimes touch for a moment
the soft down on the skin of a peach. But these were forbidden fruit. The boy hadn’t the
money for them.
He took one meal at seven in the morning when he left home; another at seven in the
evening when he returned from school. There were times – especially when he was at
school, and his teacher droned on and on, lecturing on honesty, courage, duty, and selfsacrifice – when he felt very hungry; but on the way to school, or on the way home,
there was nearly always the prospect of some wild fruit.
The boy’s name was Vijay, and he belonged to a village near Mussoorie. His parents
tilled a few narrow terraces on the hill slopes. They grew potatoes, onions, barley,
maize; barely enough to feed themselves. When greens were scarce, they boiled the
tops of the stinging-nettle and made them into a dish resembling spinach.
Vijay’s parents realised the importance of sending him to school, and it didn’t cost
them much, except for the books. But it was all of four miles to the town, and a long
walk makes a boy hungry.
But there was nearly always the wild fruit. The purple berries of the thorny bilberry
bushes, ripening in May and June. Wild strawberries, growing in shady places like
spots of blood on the deep green monsoon grass. Small, sour cherries, and tough
medlars. Vijay’s strong teeth and probing tongue extracted whatever tang or sweetness
lay hidden in them. And in March there were the rhododendron flowers.
His mother made them into jam. But Vijay liked them as they were. He placed the
petals on his tongue and chewed them till the sweet juice trickled down his throat. But
in November, there was no wild fruit. Only acorns on the oak trees, and they were
bitter, fit only for the monkeys.
He walked confidently through the bazaar, strong in the legs. He looked a healthy
boy, until you came up close and saw the patches on his skin and the dullness in his
eyes.
He passed the fruit stalls, wondering who ate all that fruit, and what happened to the
fruit that went bad; he passed the sweet shop, where hot, newly-fried jelabies lay

protected like twisted orange jewels in a glass case, and where a fat, oily man raised a
knife and plunged it deep into a thick slab of rich amber-coloured halwa.
The saliva built up in Vijay’s mouth; there was a dull ache in his stomach. But his
eyes gave away nothing of the sharp pangs he felt.
And now, a confectioner’s shop. Glass jars filled with chocolates, peppermints,
toffees – sweets he didn’t know the names of, English sweets – wrapped in bits of
coloured paper.
A boy had just bought a bag of sweets. He had one in his mouth. He was a welldressed boy; coins jingled in his pocket. The sweet moved from one cheek to the other.
He bit deep into it, and Vijay heard the crunch and looked up. The boy smiled at Vijay,
but moved away.
They met again, further along the road. Once again the boy smiled, even looked as
though he was about to offer Vijay a sweet; but this time, Vijay shyly looked away. He
did not want it to appear that he had noticed the sweets, or that he hungered for one.
But he kept meeting the boy, who always managed to reappear at some corner,
sucking a sweet, moving it about in his mouth, letting it show between his wet lips – a
sticky green thing, temptingly, lusciously beautiful.
The bag of sweets was nearly empty.
Reluctantly, Vijay decided that he must overtake the boy, forget all about the sweets,
and hurry home. Otherwise, he would be tempted to grab the bag and run!
And then, he saw the boy leave the bag on a bench, look at him once, and smile –
smile shyly and invitingly – before moving away.
Was the bag empty? Vijay wondered with mounting excitement. It couldn’t be, or it
would have blown away almost immediately. Obviously, there were still a few sweets
in it. The boy had disappeared. He had gone for his tea, and Vijay could have the rest of
the sweets.
Vijay took the bag and jammed it into a pocket of his shirt. Then he hurried
homewards. It was getting late, and he wanted to be home before dark.
As soon as he was out of the town, he opened the bag and shook the sweets out.
Their red wrappers glowed like rubies in the palm of his hand.
Carefully, he undid a wrapper.
There was no sweet inside, only a smooth, round stone.
Vijay found stones in all the wrappers. In his mind’s eye, Vijay saw the smiling face
of the boy in the bazaar: a boy who smiled sweetly but exchanged stones for sweets.
Forcing back angry tears, Vijay flung the stones down the hillside. Then he
shouldered his bag of books and began the long walk home.
There were patches of snow on the ground. The grass was a dirty brown, the bushes
were bare.
There is no wild fruit in November.

The Night the Roof Blew Off
e are used to sudden storms, up here on the first range of the Himalayas. The old
building in which we live has, for more than a hundred years, received the full
force of the wind as it sweeps across the hills from the east.
We’d lived in the building for more than ten years without a disaster. It had even
taken the shock of a severe earthquake. As my granddaughter Dolly said, ‘It’s difficult
to tell the new cracks from the old!’
It’s a two-storey building, and I live on the upper floor with my family: my three
grandchildren and their parents. The roof is made of corrugated tin sheets, the ceiling of
wooden boards. That’s the traditional Mussoorie roof.
Looking back at the experience, it was the sort of thing that should have happened in
a James Thurber story, like the dam that burst or the ghost who got in. But I wasn’t
thinking of Thurber at the time, although a few of his books were among the many I was
trying to save from the icy rain pouring into my bedroom.
Our roof had held fast in many a storm, but the wind that night was really fierce. It
came rushing at us with a high-pitched, eerie wail. The old roof groaned and protested.
It took a battering for several hours while the rain lashed against the windows and the
lights kept coming and going.
There was no question of sleeping, but we remained in bed for warmth and comfort.
The fire had long since gone out, as the chimney had collapsed, bringing down a
shower of sooty rainwater.
After about four hours of buffeting, the roof could take it no longer. My bedroom
faces east, so my portion of the roof was the first to go.
The wind got under it and kept pushing until, with a ripping, groaning sound, the
metal sheets shifted and slid off the rafters, some of them dropping with claps like
thunder on to the road below.
So that’s it, I thought. Nothing worse can happen. As long as the ceiling stays on, I’m
not getting out of bed. We’ll collect our roof in the morning.
Icy water splashing down on my face made me change my mind in a hurry. Leaping
from the bed, I found that much of the ceiling had gone, too. Water was pouring on my
open typewriter as well as on the bedside radio and bed cover.
Picking up my precious typewriter (my companion for forty years) I stumbled into
the front sitting room (and library), only to find a similar situation there. Water was
pouring through the slats of the wooden ceiling, raining down on the open bookshelves.
By now I had been joined by the children, who had come to my rescue. Their section

of the roof hadn’t gone as yet. Their parents were struggling to close a window against
the driving rain.
‘Save the books!’ shouted Dolly, the youngest, and that became our rallying cry for
the next hour or two.
Dolly and her brother Mukesh picked up armfuls of books and carried them into
their room. But the floor was awash, so the books had to be piled on their beds. Dolly
was helping me gather some of my papers when a large field rat jumped on to the desk
in front of her. Dolly squealed and ran for the door.
‘It’s all right,’ said Mukesh, whose love of animals extends even to field rats. ‘It’s
only sheltering from the storm.’
Big brother Rakesh whistled for our dog, Tony, but Tony wasn’t interested in rats
just then. He had taken shelter in the kitchen, the only dry spot in the house.
Two rooms were now practically roofless, and we could see the sky lit up by
flashes of lightning.
There were fireworks indoors, too, as water spluttered and crackled along a
damaged wire. Then the lights went out altogether.
Rakesh, at his best in an emergency, had already lit two kerosene lamps. And by
their light we continued to transfer books, papers, and clothes to the children’s room.
We noticed that the water on the floor was beginning to subside a little.
‘Where is it going?’ asked Dolly.
‘Through the floor,’ said Mukesh. ‘Down to the flat below!’
Cries of concern from our downstairs neighbours told us that they were having their
share of the flood.
Our feet were freezing because there hadn’t been time to put on proper footwear.
And besides, shoes and slippers were awash by now. All chairs and tables were piled
high with books. I hadn’t realised the extent of my library until that night!
The available beds were pushed into the driest corner of the children’s room, and
there, huddled in blankets and quilts, we spent the remaining hours of the night while
the storm continued.
Towards morning the wind fell, and it began to snow. Through the door to the sitting
room I could see snowflakes drifting through the gaps in the ceiling, settling on pictureframes. Ordinary things like a glue bottle and a small clock took on a certain beauty
when covered with soft snow.
Most of us dozed off.
When dawn came, we found the windowpanes encrusted with snow and icicles. The
rising sun struck through the gaps in the ceiling and turned everything golden. Snow
crystals glistened on the empty bookshelves. But the books had been saved.
Rakesh went out to find a carpenter and tinsmith, while the rest of us started putting
things in the sun to dry. By evening we’d put much of the roof back on.
It’s a much-improved roof now, and we look forward to the next storm with

confidence!

A Traveller’s Tale
opalpur-on-sea!
A name to conjure with… And as a boy I’d heard it mentioned, by my father and
others, and described as a quaint little seaside resort with a small port on the Orissa
coast. The years passed, and I went from boyhood to manhood and eventually old age
(is seventy-six old age? I wouldn’t know) and still it was only a place I’d heard about
and dreamt about but never visited.
Until last month, when I was a guest of KiiT International School in Bhubaneswar,
and someone asked me where I’d like to go, and I said, ‘Is Gopalpur very far?’
‘And off I went, along a plam-fringed highway, through busy little market-towns
with names Rhamba and Humma, past the enormous Chilika Lake which opens into the
sea through paddy fields and keora plantations, and finally on to Gopalpur’s beach
road, with the sun glinting like gold on the great waves of the ocean, and the fishermen
counting their catch, and the children sprinting into the sea, tumbling about in the
shallows.
But the seafront wore a neglected look. The hotels were empty, the cafés deserted. A
cheeky crow greeted me with a disconsolate caw from its perch on a weathered old
wall. Some of the buildings were recent, but around us there were also the shells of
older buildings that had fallen into ruin. And no one was going to preserve these relics
of a colonial past. A small house called ‘Brighton Villa’ still survived.
But away from the seafront a tree-lined road took us past some well-maintained
bungalows, a school, an old cemetery, and finally a PWD rest house where we were to
spend the night.
It was growing dark when we arrived, and in the twilight I could just make out the
shapes of the trees that surround the old bungalow – a hoary old banyan, a jack-fruit and
several mango trees. The light from the bungalow’s veranda fell on some oleander
bushes. A hawk moth landed on my shirt-front and appeared reluctant to leave. I took it
between my fingers and deposited it on the oleander bush.
It was almost midnight when I went to bed. The rest-house staff – the caretaker and
the gardener – went to some trouble to arrange a meal, but it was a long time coming.
The gardener told me the house had once been the residence of an Englishman who had
left the country at the time of Independence, some sixty years or more ago. Some
changes had been carried out, but the basic structure remained – high-ceilinged rooms
with skylights, a long veranda and enormous bathrooms. The bathroom was so large
you could have held a party in it. But there was just one potty and a basin. You could sit

on the potty and meditate, fixing your thoughts (or absence of thought) on the distant
basin.
I closed all doors and windows, switched off all lights (I find it impossible to sleep
with a light on), and went to bed.
It was a comfortable bed, and I soon fell asleep. Only to be awakened by a light
tapping on the window near my bed.
Probably a branch of the oleander bush, I thought, and fell asleep again. But there
was more tapping, louder this time, and then I was fully awake.
I sat up in bed and drew aside the curtains.
There was a face at the window.
In the half-light from the veranda I could not make out the features, but it was
definitely a human face.
Obviously someone wanted to come in, the caretaker perhaps, or the chowkidar. But
then, why not knock on the door? Perhaps he had. The door was at the other end of the
room, and I may not have heard the knocking.
I am not in the habit of opening my doors to strangers in the night, but somehow I did
not feel threatened or uneasy, so I got up, unlatched the door, and opened it for my
midnight visitor.
Standing on the threshold was an imposing figure.
A tall dark man, turbaned, and dressed all in white. He wore some sort of uniform –
the kind worn by those immaculate doormen at five-star hotels; but a rare sight in
Gopalpur-on-sea.
‘What is it you want?’ I asked. ‘Are you staying here?’
He did not reply but looked past me, possibly through me, and then walked silently
into the room. I stood there, bewildered and awestruck, as he strode across to my bed,
smoothed out the sheets and patted down my pillow. He then walked over to the next
room and came back with a glass and a jug of water, which he placed on the bedside
table. As if that were not enough, he picked up my day clothes, folded them neatly and
placed them on a vacant chair. Then, just as unobtrusively and without so much as a
glance in my direction, he left the room and walked out into the night.
Early next morning, as the sun came up like thunder over the Bay of Bengal, I went
down to the sea again, picking my way over the puddles of human excreta that
decorated parts of the beach. Well, you can’t have everything. The world might be more
beautiful without the human presence; but then, who would appreciate it?
Back at the rest house for breakfast, I was reminded of my visitor of the previous
night.
‘Who was the tall gentleman who came to my room last night?’ I asked. ‘He looked
like a butler. Smartly dressed, very dignified.’
The caretaker and the gardener exchanged meaningful glances.
‘You tell him,’ said the caretaker to his companion.

‘It must have been Hazoor Ali,’ said the gardener, nodding. ‘He was the orderly, the
personal servant of Mr Robbins, the port commissioner – the Englishman who lived
here.’
‘But that was over sixty years ago,’ I said. ‘They must all be dead.’
‘Yes, all are dead, sir. But sometimes the ghost of Hazoor Ali appears, especially if
one of our guests reminds him of his old master. He was quite devoted to him, sir. In
fact, he received this bungalow as a parting gift when Mr Robbins left the country. But
unable to maintain it, he sold it to the government and returned to his home in Cuttack.
He died many years ago, but revisits this place sometimes. Do not feel alarmed, sir. He
means no harm. And he does not appear to everyone – you are the lucky one this year! I
have but seen him twice. Once, when I took service here twenty years ago, and then,
last year, the night before the cyclone. He came to warn us, I think. Went to every door
and window and made sure they were secured. Never said a word. Just vanished into
the night.’
‘And it’s time for me to vanish by day,’ I said, getting my things ready. I had to be in
Bhubaneswar by late afternoon, to board the plane for Delhi. I was sorry it had been
such a short stay. I would have liked to spend a few days in Gopalpur, wandering about
its backwaters, old roads, mango groves, fishing villages, sandy inlets… Another time
perhaps. In this life, if I am so lucky. Or the next, if I am luckier still.
At the airport in Bhubaneswar, the security asked me for my photo-identity. ‘Driving
licence, pan card, passport? Anything with your picture on it will do, since you have an
e-ticket,’ he explained.
I do not have a driving licence and have never felt the need to carry my pan card
with me. Luckily, I always carry my passport on my travels. I looked for it in my little
travel-bag and then in my suitcase, but couldn’t find it. I was feeling awkward fumbling
in all my pockets, when another senior officer came to my rescue. ‘It’s all right. Let him
in. I know Mr Ruskin Bond,’ he called out, and beckoned me inside. I thanked him and
hurried into the check-in area.
All the time in the flight, I was trying to recollect where I might have kept my
passport. Possibly tucked away somewhere inside the suitcase, I thought. Now that my
baggage was sealed at the airport, I decided to look for it when I reached home.
A day later I was back in my home in the hills, tired after a long road journey from
Delhi. I like travelling by road, there is so much to see, but the ever-increasing volume
of traffic turns it into an obstacle race most of the time. To add to my woes, my passport
was still missing. I looked for it everywhere – my suitcase, travel-bag, in all my
pockets.
I gave up the search. Either I had dropped it somewhere, or I had left it at Gopalpur.
I decided to ring up and check with the rest house staff the next day.
It was a frosty night, bitingly cold, so I went to bed early, well-covered with razai
and blanket. Only two nights previously I had been sleeping under a fan!

It was a windy night, the windows were rattling; and the old tin roof was groaning, a
loose sheet flapping about and making a frightful din.
I slept only fitfully.
When the wind abated, I heard someone knocking on my front door.
‘Who’s there?’ I called, but there was no answer.
The knocking continued, insistent, growing louder all the time.
‘Who’s there? Kaun hai?’ I call again.
Only that knocking.
Someone in distress, I thought. I’d better see who it is. I got up shivering, and
walked barefoot to the front door. Opened it slowly, opened it wider, someone stepped
out of the shadows.
Hazoor Ali salaamed, entered the room, and as in Gopalpur, he walked silently into
the room. It was lying in disarray because of my frantic search for my passport. He
arranged the room, removed my garments from my travel-bag, folded them and placed
them neatly upon the cupboard shelves. Then, he did a salaam again and waited at the
door.
Strange, I thought. If he did the entire room why did he not set the travel-bag in its
right place? Why did he leave it lying on the floor? Possibly he didn't know where to
keep it; he left the last bit of work for me. I picked up the bag to place it on the top
shelf. And there, from its front pocket my passport fell out, on to the floor.
I turned to look at Hazoor Ali, but he had already walked out into the cold darkness.

And Now We are Twelve
eople often ask me why I’ve chosen to live in Mussoorie for so long – almost forty
years, without any significant breaks.
‘I forgot to go away,’ I tell them, but of course, that isn’t the real reason.
The people here are friendly, but then people are friendly in a great many other
places. The hills, the valleys are beautiful; but they are just as beautiful in Kulu or
Kumaon.
‘This is where the family has grown up and where we all live,’ I say, and those who
don’t know me are puzzled because the general impression of the writer is of a
reclusive old bachelor.
Unmarried I may be, but single I am not. Not since Prem came to live and work with
me in 1970. A year later, he was married. Then his children came along and stole my
heart; and when they grew up, their children came along and stole my wits. So now I’m
an enchanted bachelor, head of a family of twelve. Sometimes I go out to bat,
sometimes to bowl, but generally I prefer to be twelfth man, carrying out the drinks.
In the old days, when I was a solitary writer living on baked beans, the prospect of
my suffering from obesity was very remote. Now there is a little more of author than
there used to be, and the other day five-year-old Gautam patted me on my tummy (or
balcony, as I prefer to call it) and remarked; ‘Dada, you should join the WWF.’
‘I’m already a member,’ I said, ‘I joined the World Wildlife Fund years ago.’
‘Not that,’ he said. ‘I mean the World Wrestling Federation.’
If I have a tummy today, it’s thanks to Gautam’s grandfather and now his mother who,
over the years, have made sure that I am well-fed and well-proportioned.
Forty years ago, when I was a lean young man, people would look at me and say,
‘Poor chap, he’s definitely undernourished. What on earth made him take up writing as
a profession?’ Now they look at me and say, ‘You wouldn’t think he was a writer,
would you? Too well nourished!’

It was a cold, wet and windy March evening when Prem came back from the village
with his wife and first-born child, then just four months old. In those days, they had to
walk to the house from the bus stand; it was a half-hour walk in the cold rain, and the
baby was all wrapped up when they entered the front room. Finally, I got a glimpse of
him. And he of me, and it was friendship at first sight. Little Rakesh (as he was to be
called) grabbed me by the nose and held on. He did not have much of a nose to grab,

but he had a dimpled chin and I played with it until he smiled.
The little chap spent a good deal of his time with me during those first two years in
Maplewood – learning to crawl, to toddle, and then to walk unsteadily about the little
sitting-room. I would carry him into the garden, and later, up the steep gravel path to the
main road. Rakesh enjoyed these little excursions, and so did I, because in pointing out
trees, flowers, birds, butterflies, beetles, grasshoppers, et al, I was giving myself a
chance to observe them better instead of just taking them for granted.
In particular, there was a pair of squirrels that lived in the big oak tree outside the
cottage. Squirrels are rare in Mussoorie though common enough down in the valley.
This couple must have come up for the summer. They became quite friendly, and
although they never got around to taking food from our hands, they were soon entering
the house quite freely. The sitting room window opened directly on to the oak tree
whose various denizens – ranging from stag-beetles to small birds and even an
acrobatic bat – took to darting in and out of the cottage at various times of the day or
night.
Life at Maplewood was quite idyllic, and when Rakesh’s baby brother, Suresh,
came into the world, it seemed we were all set for a long period of domestic bliss; but
at such times tragedy is often lurking just around the corner. Suresh was just over a year
old when he contracted tetanus. Doctors and hospitals were of no avail. He suffered –
as any child would from this terrible affliction – and left this world before he had a
chance of getting to know it. His parents were broken-hearted. And I feared for Rakesh,
for he wasn’t a very healthy boy, and two of his cousins in the village had already
succumbed to tuberculosis.
It was to be a difficult year for me. A criminal charge was brought against me for a
slightly risqué story I’d written for a Bombay magazine. I had to face trial in Bombay
and this involved three journeys there over a period of a year and a half, before an irate
but perceptive judge found the charges baseless and gave me an honourable acquittal.
It’s the only time I’ve been involved with the law and I sincerely hope it is the last.
Most cases drag on interminably, and the main beneficiaries are the lawyers. My trial
would have been much longer had not the prosecutor died of a heart attack in the middle
of the proceedings. His successor did not pursue it with the same vigour. His heart was
not in it. The whole issue had started with a complaint by a local politician, and when
he lost interest so did the prosecution. Nevertheless the trial, once begun, had to be
seen through. The defence (organised by the concerned magazine) marshalled its
witnesses (which included Nissim Ezekiel and the Marathi playwright Vijay
Tendulkar). I made a short speech which couldn’t have been very memorable as I have
forgotten it! And everyone, including the judge, was bored with the whole business.
After that, I steered clear of controversial publications. I have never set out to shock the
world. Telling a meaningful story was all that really mattered. And that is still the case.
I was looking forward to continuing our idyllic existence in Maplewood, but it was

not to be. The powers-that-be, in the shape of the Public Works Department (PWD), had
decided to build a ‘strategic’ road just below the cottage and without any warning to us,
all the trees in the vicinity were felled (including the friendly old oak) and the hillside
was rocked by explosives and bludgeoned by bulldozers. I decided it was time to
move. Prem and Chandra (Rakesh’s mother) wanted to move too; not because of the
road, but because they associated the house with the death of little Suresh, whose
presence seemed to haunt every room, every corner of the cottage. His little cries of
pain and suffering still echoed through the still hours of the night.
I rented rooms at the top of Landour, a good thousand feet higher up the mountain.
Rakesh was now old enough to go to school, and every morning I would walk with him
down to the little convent school near the clock tower. Prem would go to fetch him in
the afternoon. The walk took us about half-an-hour, and on the way Rakesh would ask
for a story and I would have to rack my brains in order to invent one. I am not the most
inventive of writers, and fantastical plots are beyond me. My forte is observation,
recollection, and reflection. Small boys prefer action. So I invented a leopard who
suffered from acute indigestion because he’d eaten one human too many and a belt
buckle was causing an obstruction.
This went down quite well until Rakesh asked me how the leopard got around the
problem of the victim’s clothes.
‘The secret,’ I said, ‘is to pounce on them when their trousers are off!’
Not the stuff of which great picture books are made, but then, I’ve never attempted to
write stories for beginners. Red Riding Hood’s granny-eating wolf always scared me
as a small boy, and yet parents have always found it acceptable for toddlers. Possibly
they feel grannies are expendable.
Mukesh was born around this time and Savitri (Dolly) a couple of years later. When
Dolly grew older, she was annoyed at having been named Savitri (my choice), which is
now considered very old-fashioned; so we settled for Dolly. I can understand a child’s
dissatisfaction with given names.
My first name was Owen, which in Welsh means ‘brave’. As I am not in the least
brave, I have preferred not to use it. One given name and one surname should be
enough.
When my granny said, ‘But you should try to be brave, otherwise how will you
survive in this cruel world?’ I replied: ‘Don’t worry, I can run very fast.’
Not that I’ve ever had to do much running, except when I was pursued by a lissome
Australian lady who thought I’d make a good obedient husband. It wasn’t so much the
lady I was running from, but the prospect of spending the rest of my life in some remote
cattle station in the Australian outback. Anyone who has tried to drag me away from
India has always met with stout resistance.

Up on the heights of Landour lived a motley crowd. My immediate neighbours included
a Frenchwoman who played the sitar (very badly) all through the night; and a Spanish
lady with two husbands, one of whom practised acupuncture – rather ineffectively as
far as he was concerned, for he seemed to be dying of some mysterious debilitating
disease. Another neighbour came and went rather mysteriously, and finally ended up in
Tihar jail, having been apprehended at Delhi carrying a large amount of contraband
hashish.
Apart from these and a few other colourful characters, the area was inhabitated by
some very respectable people, retired brigadiers, air marshals and rear admirals,
almost all of whom were busy writing their memoirs. I had to read or listen to extracts
from their literary efforts. This was slow torture. A few years before, I had done a stint
of editing for a magazine called Imprint. It had involved going through hundreds of
badly written manuscripts, and in some cases (friends of the owner!) rewriting some of
them for publication. One of life’s joys had been to throw up that particular job, and
now here I was, besieged by all the top brass of the army, navy and air force, each one
determined that I should read, inwardly digest, improve, and if possible find a
publisher for their outpourings. Thank goodness they were all retired. I could not be
shot or court-martialled. But at least two of them set their wives upon me, and these
intrepid ladies would turn up around noon with my ‘homework’ – typescripts to read
and edit! There was no escape. My own writing was of no consequence to them. I told
them that I was taking sitar lessons, but they disapproved, saying I was more suited to
the tabla.
When Prem discovered a set of vacant rooms further down the Landour slope, close
to school and bazaar, I rented them without hesitation. This was Ivy Cottage. Come up
and see me sometime, but leave your manuscripts behind.
When we came to Ivy Cottage in 1980, we were six, Dolly having just been born.
Now, twenty-four years later, we are twelve. I think that’s a reasonable expansion. The
increase has been brought about by Rakesh’s marriage twelve years ago, and Mukesh’s
marriage two years ago. Both precipitated themselves into marriage when they were
barely twenty, and both were lucky. Beena and Binita, who happen to be real sisters,
have brightened and enlivened our lives with their happy, positive natures and the
wonderful children they have brought into the world. More about them later.
Ivy Cottage has, on the whole, been kind to us, and particularly kind to me. Some
houses like their occupants, others don’t. Maplewood, set in the shadow of the hill,
lacked a natural cheerfulness; there was a settled gloom about the place. The house at
the top of Landour was too exposed to the elements to have any sort of character. The
wind moaning in the deodars may have inspired the sitar player but it did nothing for
my writing. I produced very little up there.
On the other hand, Ivy Cottage – especially my little room facing the sunrise – has
been conducive to creative work. Novellas, poems, essays, children’s stories,

anthologies, have all come tumbling on to whatever sheets of paper happen to be
nearest me. As I write by hand, I have only to grab for the nearest pad, loose sheet,
page-proof or envelope whenever the muse take hold of me; which is surprisingly often.
I came here when I was nearing fifty. Now I’m approaching eighty, and instead of
drying up, as some writers do in their later years, I find myself writing with as much
ease and assurance as when I was twenty. And I enjoy writing, it’s not a burdensome
task. I may not have anything of earth-shattering significance to convey to the world, but
in conveying my sentiments to you, dear readers, and in telling you something about my
relationship with people and the natural world, I hope to bring a little pleasure and
sunshine into your life.
Life isn’t a bed of roses, not for any of us, and I have never had the comforts or
luxuries that wealth can provide. But here I am, doing my own thing, in my own time
and my own way. What more can I ask of life? Give me a big cash prize and I’d still be
here. I happen to like the view from my window. And I like to have Gautam coming up
to me, patting me on the tummy, and telling me that I’ll make a good goalkeeper one day.
It’s a Sunday morning, as I come to the conclusion of this chapter. There’s bedlam in
the house. Siddharth’s football keeps smashing against the front door. Shrishti is
practising her dance routine in the back verandah. Gautam has cut his finger and is
trying his best to bandage it with cellotape. He is, of course, the youngest of Rakesh’s
three musketeers, and probably the most independent-minded. Siddharth, now ten, is
restless, never quite able to expend all his energy. ‘Does not pay enough attention,’ says
his teacher. It must be hard for anyone to pay attention in a class of sixty! How does the
poor teacher pay attention?
If you, dear reader, have any ambitions to be a writer, you must first rid yourself of
any notion that perfect peace and quiet is the first requirement. There is no such thing as
perfect peace and quiet except perhaps in a monastery or a cave in the mountains. And
what would you write about, living in a cave? One should be able to write in a train, a
bus, a bullock-cart, in good weather or bad, on a park bench or in the middle of a noisy
classroom.
Of course, the best place is the sun-drenched desk right next to my bed. It isn’t
always sunny here, but on a good day like this, it’s ideal. The children are getting ready
for school, dogs are barking in the street, and down near the water tap there’s an
altercation between two women with empty buckets, the tap having dried up. But these
are all background noises and will subside in due course. They are not directed at me.
Hello! Here’s Atish, Mukesh’s little ten-month old infant, crawling over the rug,
curious to know why I’m sitting on the edge of my bed scribbling away, when I should
be playing with him. So I shall play with him for five minutes and then come back to
this page. Giving him my time is important. After all, I won’t be around when he grows
up.
Half-an-hour later. Atish soon tired of playing with me, but meanwhile Gautam had

absconded with my pen. When I asked him to return it, he asked, ‘Why don’t you get a
computer? Then we can play games on it.’
‘My pen is faster than any computer,’ I tell him. ‘I wrote three pages this morning
without getting out of bed. And yesterday I wrote two pages sitting under the chestnut
tree.’
‘Until a chestnut fell on your head,’ says Gautam, ‘did it hurt?’
‘Only a little,’ I said, putting on a brave front.
He had saved the chestnut and now he showed it to me. The smooth brown horsechestnut shone in the sunlight.
‘Let’s stick it in the ground,’ I said. ‘Then in the spring a chestnut tree will come up.’
So we went outside and planted the chestnut on a plot of wasteland. Hopefully a
small tree will burst through the earth at about the time this book is published.
Thirty years ago, Rakesh and I had planted a cherry seed on the hillside. It grew into
a tree, which is still bursting with blossoms every year. Now it’s Gautam’s turn. And so
we move on.

Roald Dahl
The Collected Short Stories of Roald Dahl
Volume II
Complete and Unabridged
This further collection of Roald Dahi's adult short stories, from his worl
d-famous books, again includes many seen in the television series, TALES O
F THE UNEXPECTED. Through the stories runs a vein of macabre malevolence,
springing from slight, almost inconsequential everyday things. These bizar
re plots--spiced with vibrant characters and subtle twists and turns--are
utterly addictive.
First published in Great Britain in 1991
'Someone Like You' © Roald Dahl 1948, 1949, 1950, 1952, 1953, 1961
'The Umbrella Man', 'Mr Botibol', 'Vengeance is Mine mc' and 'The Butler'
© Roald Dahl 1973, 1980
'Ah, Sweet Mystery of Life' © Roald Dahl 1976, 1989
'The Bookseller' © Roald Dahl 1986
'The Hitchhiker' © Roald Dahl 1977
'The Surgeon' © Roald Dahl 1986

CONTENTS
SOMEONE LIKE YOU
Taste
Lamb to the Slaughter
Man from the South
The Soldier
My Lady Love, My Dove
Dip in the Pool
Galloping Foxley
Skin
Poison
The Wish
Neck
The Sound Machine
Nunc Dimittis
The Great Automatic Grammatizator

Claud's Dog
The Ratcatcher
Rummins
Mr Hoddy
Mr Feasey
EIGHT FURTHER TALES OF THE UNEXPECTED
The Umbrella Man
Mr Botibol
Vengeance is Mine Inc.
The Butler
Ah, Sweet Mystery of Life
The Bookseller
The Hitchhiker
The Surgeon

SOMEONE LIKE YOU

Taste
THERE were six of us to dinner that night at Mike Schofield's house in Lon
don: Mike and his wife and daughter, and my wife and I, and a man called R
ichard Pratt.
Richard Pratt was a famous gourmet. He was president of a small society
known as the Epicures, and each month he circulated privately to its membe
rs a pamphlet on food and wines. He organized dinners where sumptuous dishe
s and rare wines were served. He refused to smoke for fear of harming his p
alate, and when discussing a wine, he had a curious, rather droll habit of
referring to it as though it were a living being. 'A prudent wine,' he woul

d say, 'rather diffident and evasive, but quite prudent.' Or, 'A good-humou
red wine, benevolent and cheerful slightly obscene, perhaps, but none the l
ess good-humoured.'
I had been to dinner at Mike's twice before when Richard Pratt was there
, and on each occasion Mike and his wife had gone out of their way to produc
e a special meal for the famous gourmet. And this one, clearly, was to be no
exception. The moment we entered the dining-room, I could see that the tabl
e was laid for a feast. The tall candles, the yellow roses, the quantity of
shining silver, the three wineglasses to each person, and above all, the fai
nt scent of roasting meat from the kitchen brought the first warm oozings of
saliva to my mouth.
As we sat down, I remembered that on both Richard Pratt's previous visits
Mike had played a little betting game with him over the claret, challenging
him to name its breed and its vintage. Pratt had replied that that should not
be too difficult provided it was one of the great years. Mike had then bet h
im a case of the wine in question that he could not do it. Pratt had accepted
, and had won both times. Tonight I felt sure that the little game would be p
layed over again, for Mike was quite willing to lose the bet in order to prov
e that his wine was good enough to be recognized, and Pratt, for his part, se
emed to take a grave, restrained pleasure in displaying his knowledge.
The meal began with a plate of whitebait, fried very crisp in butter, an
d to go with it there was a Moselle. Mike got up and poured the wine himself
, and when he sat down again, I could see that he was watching Richard Pratt
. He had set the bottle in front of me so that I could read the label. It sa
id, 'Geierslay Ohligsberg, 1945'. He leaned over and whispered to me that Ge
ierslay was a tiny village in the Moselle, almost unknown outside Germany. H
e said that this wine we were drinking was something unusual, that the outpu
t of the vineyard was so small that it was almost impossible for a stranger
to get any of it. He had visited Geierslay personally the previous summer in
order to obtain the few bottles that they had finally allowed him to have.
"I doubt whether anyone else in the country has any of it at the moment,"
he said. I saw him glance again at Richard Pratt. "Great thing about Moselle
," he continued, raising his voice, "it's the perfect wine to serve before a
claret. A lot of people serve a Rhine wine instead, but that's because they d
on't know any better. A Rhine wine will kill a delicate claret, you know that
? It's barbaric to serve a Rhine before a claret. But a Moselle--ah!--a Mosel
le is exactly right."
Mike Schofield was an amiable, middle-aged man, but he was a stockbroke
r. To be precise, he was a jobber in the stock market, and like a number of
his kind, he seemed to be somewhat embarrassed, almost ashamed to find tha
t he had made so much money with so slight a talent. In his heart he knew t
hat he was not really much more than a bookmaker--an unctuous, infinitely r

espectable, secretly unscrupulous bookmaker--and he knew that his friends k
new it, too. So he was seeking now to become a man of culture, to cultivate
a literary and aesthetic taste, to collect paintings, music, books, and al
l the rest of it. His little sermon about Rhine wine and Moselle was a part
of this thing, this culture that he sought.
"A charming little wine, don't you think?" he said. He was still watchin
g Richard Pratt. I could see him give a rapid furtive glance down the table
each time he dropped his head to take a mouthful of whitebait. I could almos
t feel him waiting for the moment when Pratt would take his first sip, and l
ook up from his glass with a smile of pleasure, of astonishment, perhaps eve
n of wonder, and then there would be a discussion and Mike would tell him ab
out the village of Geierslay.
But Richard Pratt did not taste his wine. He was completely engrossed in
conversation with Mike's eighteen-year-old daughter, Louise. He was half tu
rned towards her, smiling at her, telling her, so far as I could gather, som
e story about a chef in a Paris restaurant. As he spoke, he leaned closer an
d closer to her, seeming in his eagerness almost to impinge upon her, and th
e poor girl leaned as far as she could away from him nodding politely, rathe
r desperately, and looking not at his face but at the topmost button of his
dinner jacket.
We finished our fish, and the maid came round removing the plates. When
she came to Pratt, she saw that he had not yet touched his food, so she he
sitated, and Pratt noticed her. He waved her away, broke off his conversati
on, and quickly began to eat, popping the little crisp brown fish quickly i
nto his mouth with rapid jabbing movements of his fork. Then, when he had f
inished, he reached for his glass, and in two short swallows he tipped the
wine down his throat and turned immediately to resume his conversation with
Louise Schofield.
Mike saw it all. I was conscious of him sitting there, very still, contain
ing himself, looking at his guest. His round jovial face seemed to loosen slig
htly and to sag, but he contained himself and was still and said nothing.
Soon the maid came forward with the second course. This was a large roas
t beef. She placed it on the table in front of Mike who stood up and carved
it, cutting the slices very thin, laying them gently on the plates for the m
aid to take around. When he had served everyone, including himself, he put d
own the carving knife and leaned forward with both hands on the edge of the
table.
"Now," he said, speaking to all of us but looking at Richard Pratt. "Now fo
r the claret. I must go and fetch the claret, if you'll excuse me."
"You go and fetch it, Mike?" I said. "Where is it?"
"In my study, with the cork out--breathing."
"Why the study?"

"Acquiring room temperature, of course. It's been there twenty-four hours
."
"But why the study?"
"It's the best place in the house. Richard helped me choose it last time he
was here."
At the sound of his name, Pratt looked round.
"That's right, isn't it?" Mike said.
"Yes," Pratt answered, nodding gravely. "That's right."
"On top of the green filing cabinet in my study," Mike said. "That's the
place we chose. A good draught-free spot in a room with an even temperature
. Excuse me now, will you, while I fetch it."
The thought of another wine to play with had restored his humour, and h
e hurried out of the door, to return a minute later more slowly, walking so
ftly, holding in both hands a wine basket in which a dark bottle lay. The l
abel was out of sight, facing downwards. "Now!" he cried as he came towards
the table. "What about this one, Richard? You'll never name this one!"
Richard Pratt turned slowly and looked up at Mike, then his eyes travelle
d down to the bottle nestling in its small wicker basket, and he raised his e
yebrows; a slight supercilious arching of the brows, and with it a pushing ou
tward of the wet lower lip, suddenly imperious and ugly.
"You'll never get it," Mike said. "Not in a hundred years."
"A claret?" Richard Pratt asked, condescending.
"Of course."
"I assume, then, that it's from one of the smaller vineyards?"
"Maybe it is, Richard. And then again, maybe it isn't."
"But it's a good year? One of the great years?"
"Yes, I guarantee that."
"Then it shouldn't be too difficult," Richard Pratt said, drawling his w
ords, looking exceedingly bored. Except that, to me, there was something str
ange about his drawling and his boredom: between the eyes a shadow of someth
ing evil, and in his bearing an intentness that gave me a faint sense of une
asiness as I watched him.
"This one is really rather difficult," Mike said. "I won't force you to bet o
n this one."
"Indeed. And why not?" Again the slow arching of the brows, the cool, in
tent look.
"Because it's difficult."
"That's not very complimentary to me, you know."
"My dear man," Mike said, "I'll bet you with pleasure, if that's what you
wish."
"It shouldn't be too hard to name it."
"You mean you want to bet?"

"I'm perfectly willing to bet," Richard Pratt said.
"All right, then, we'll have the usual. A case of the wine itself."
"You don't think I'll be able to name it, do you?"
"As a matter of fact, and with all due respect, I don't," Mike said. He
was making some effort to remain polite, but Pratt was not bothering overmuc
h to conceal his contempt for the whole proceeding. And yet, curiously, his
next question seemed to betray a certain interest.
"You like to increase the bet?"
"No, Richard. A case is plenty."
"Would you like to bet fifty cases?"
"That would be silly."
Mike stood very still behind his chair at the head of the table, carefully
holding the bottle in its ridiculous wicker basket. There was a trace of whit
eness around his nostrils now, and his mouth was shut very tight.
Pratt was lolling back in his chair, looking up at him, the eyebrows rais
ed, the eyes half closed, a little smile touching the corners of his lips. An
d again I saw, or thought I saw, something distinctly disturbing about the ma
n's face, that shadow of intentness between the eyes, and in the eyes themsel
ves, right in their centres where it was black, a small slow spark of shrewdn
ess, hiding.
"So you don't want to increase the bet?"
"As far as I'm concerned, old man, I don't give a damn," Mike said. "I'll
bet you anything you like."
The three women and I sat quietly, watching the two men. Mike's wife w
as becoming annoyed; her mouth had gone sour and I felt that at any moment
she was going to interrupt. Our roast beef lay before us on our plates, s
lowly steaming.
"So you'll bet me anything I like?"
"That's what I told you. I'll bet you anything you damn well please, if you
want to make an issue out of it."
"Even ten thousand pounds?"
"Certainly I will, if that's the way you want it." Mike was more confide
nt now. He knew quite well that he could call any sum Pratt cared to mention
.
"So you say I can name the bet?" Pratt asked again.
"That's what I said."
There was a pause while Pratt looked slowly around the table, first at me
, then at the three women, each in turn. He appeared to be reminding us that
we were witness to the offer.
"Mike!" Mrs Schofield said. "Mike, why don't we stop this nonsense and ea
t our food. It's getting cold."
"But it isn't nonsense," Pratt told her evenly. "We're making a little bet."

I noticed the maid standing in the background holding a dish of vegetab
les, wondering whether to come forward with them or not.
"All right then," Pratt said. "I'll tell you what I want you to bet."
"Come on, then," Mike said, rather reckless. "I don't give a damn what it i
s--you're on."
Pratt nodded, and again the little smile moved the corners of his lips, an
d then, quite slowly, looking at Mike all the time, he said, "I want you to be
t me the hand of your daughter in marriage."
Louise Schofield gave a jump. "Hey!" she cried. "No! That's not funny! Lo
ok here, Daddy, that's not funny at all."
"No, dear," her mother said. "They're only joking."
"I'm not joking," Richard Pratt said.
"It's ridiculous," Mike said. He was off balance again now.
"You said you'd bet anything I liked."
"I meant money."
"You didn't say money."
"That's what I meant."
"Then it's a pity you didn't say it. But anyway, if you wish to go back on y
our offer, that's quite all right with me."
"It's not a question of going back on my offer, old man. It's a no-bet a
ny way, because you can't match the stake. You yourself don't happen to have
a daughter to put up against mine in case you lose. And if you had, I would
n't want to marry her."
"I'm glad of that, dear," his wife said.
"I'll put up anything you like," Pratt announced. "My house, for examp
le. How about my house?"
"Which one?" Mike asked, joking now.
"The country one."
"Why not the other one as well?"
"All right then, if you wish it. Both my houses."
At that point I saw Mike pause. He took a step forward and placed the bo
ttle in its basket gently down on the table. He moved the saltcellar to one
side, then the pepper, and then he picked up his knife, studied the blade th
oughtfully for a moment, and put it down again. His daughter, too, had seen
him pause.
"Now, Daddy!" she cried. "Don't be absurd! It's too silly for words. I refus
e to be betted on like this."
"Quite right, dear," her mother said. "Stop it at once, Mike, and sit down
and eat your food."
Mike ignored her. He looked over at his daughter and he smiled, a slow,
fatherly, protective smile. But in his eyes, suddenly, there glimmered a lit
tle triumph. "You know," he said, smiling as he spoke. "You know, Louise, we

ought to think about this a bit."
"Now, stop it, Daddy! I refuse even to listen to you! Why, I've never hear
d anything so ridiculous in my life!"
"No, seriously, my dear. Just wait a moment and hear what I have to say."
"But I don't want to hear it."
"Louise! Please! It's like this. Richard, here, has offered us a serious
bet. He is the one who wants to make it, not me. And if he loses, he will hav
e to hand over a considerable amount of property. Now, wait a minute, my dear
, don't interrupt. The point is this. He cannot possibly win."
"He seems to think he can."
"Now listen to me, because I know what I'm talking about. The expert, wh
en tasting a claret--so long as it is not one of the famous great wines like
Lafite or Latour--can only get a certain way towards naming the vineyard. H
e can, of course, tell you the Bordeaux district from which the wine comes,
whether it is from St Emilion, Pomerol, Graves, or MŽdoc. But then each dist
rict has several communes, little counties, and each county has many, many s
mall vineyards. It is impossible for a man to differentiate between them all
by taste and smell alone. I don't mind telling you that this one I've got h
ere is a wine from a small vineyard that is surrounded by many other small v
ineyards, and he'll never get it. It's impossible."
"You can't be sure of that," his daughter said.
"I'm telling you I can. Though I say it myself, I understand quite a bit
about this wine business, you know. And anyway, heavens alive, girl, I'm yo
ur father and you don't think I'd let you in for--for something you didn't w
ant, do you? I'm trying to make you some money."
"Mike!" his wife said sharply. "Stop it now, Mike, please!"
Again he ignored her. "If you will take this bet," he said to his daughter
, "in ten minutes you will be the owner of two large houses."
"But I don't want two large houses, Daddy."
"Then sell them. Sell them back to him on the spot. I'll arrange all that fo
r you. And then, just think of it, my dear, you'll be rich! You'll be independen
t for the rest of your life!"
"Oh, Daddy, I don't like it. I think it's silly."
"So do I," the mother said. She jerked her head briskly up and down as
she spoke, like a hen. "You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Michael, even
suggesting such a thing! Your own daughter, too!"
Mike didn't even look at her. "Take it!" he said eagerly, staring hard at th
e girl. "Take it, quick! I'll guarantee you won't lose."
"But I don't like it, Daddy."
"Come on, girl. Take it!"
Mike was pushing her hard. He was leaning towards her, fixing her with t

wo hard bright eyes, and it was not easy for the daughter to resist him.
"But what if I lose?"
"I keep telling you, you can't lose. I'll guarantee it."
"Oh, Daddy must I?"
"I'm making you a fortune. So come on now. What do you say, Louise? Al
l right?"
For the last time, she hesitated. Then she gave a helpless little shrug of t
he shoulders and said, "Oh, all right, then. Just so long as you swear there's n
o danger of losing."
"Good!" Mike cried. "That's fine! Then it's a bet!"
"Yes," Richard Pratt said, looking at the girl. "It's a bet."
Immediately, Mike picked up the wine, tipped the first thimbleful into h
is own glass, then skipped excitedly around the table filling up the others.
Now everyone was watching Richard Pratt, watching his face as he reached sl
owly for his glass with his right hand and lifted it to his nose. The man wa
s about fifty years old and he did not have a pleasant face. Somehow, it was
all mouth--mouth and lips--the full, wet lips of the professional gourmet,
the lower lip hanging downward in the centre, a pendulous, permanently open
taster's lip, shaped open to receive the rim of a glass or a morsel of food.
Like a keyhole, I thought, watching it; his mouth is like a large wet keyhole.
Slowly he lifted the glass to his nose. The point of the nose entered th
e glass and moved over the surface of the wine, delicately sniffing. He swir
led the wine gently around in the glass to receive the bouquet. His concentr
ation was intense. He had closed his eyes, and now the whole top half of his
body, the head and neck and chest, seemed to become a kind of huge sensitiv
e smelling-machine, receiving, filtering, analysing the message from the sni
ffing nose.
Mike, I noticed, was lounging in his chair, apparently unconcerned, but h
e was watching every move. Mrs Schofield, the wife, sat prim and upright at t
he other end of the table, looking straight ahead, her face tight with disapp
roval. The daughter, Louise, had shifted her chair away a little, and sidewis
e, facing the gourmet, and she, like her father, was watching closely.
For at least a minute, the smelling process continued; then, without ope
ning his eyes or moving his head, Pratt lowered the glass to his mouth and t
ipped in almost half the contents. He paused, his mouth full of wine, gettin
g the first taste; then, he permitted some of it to trickle down his throat
and I saw his Adam's apple move as it passed by. But most of it he retained
in his mouth. And now, without swallowing again, he drew in through the lips
a thin breath of air which mingled with the fumes of the wine in the mouth
and passed on down into his lungs. He held the breath, blew it out through h
is nose, and finally began to roll the wine around under the tongue, and che
wed it, actually chewed it with his teeth as though it were bread.

It was a solemn, impressive performance, and I must say he did it well.
"Urn," he said, putting down the glass, running a pink tongue over his lip
s, "Urn--yes. A very interesting little wine gentle and gracious, almost femin
ine in the after-taste."
There was an excess of saliva in his mouth, and as he spoke he spat an occ
asional bright speck of it on to the table.
"Now we can start to eliminate," he said. "You will pardon me for doing
this carefully, but there is much at stake. Normally I would perhaps take a
bit of a chance, leaping forward quickly and landing right in the middle of
the vineyard of my choice. But this time--I must move cautiously this time,
must I not?" He looked up at Mike and he smiled, a thick-lipped, wet-lipped
smile. Mike did not smile back.
"First, then, which district in Bordeaux does this wine come from? That's
not too difficult to guess. It is far too light in the body to be from either
St Emilion or Graves. It is obviously a MŽdoc. There's no doubt about that.
"Now--from which commune in MŽdoc does it come? That also, by elimination,
should not be too difficult to decide. Margaux? No. It cannot be Margaux. It
has not the violent bouquet of a Margaux. Pauillac? It cannot be Pauillac, eit
her. It is too tender, too gentle and wistful for Pauillac. The wine of Pauill
ac has a character that is almost imperious in its taste. And also, to me, a P
auillac contains just a little pith, a curious dusty, pithy flavour that the g
rape acquires from the soil of the district. No, no. This--this is a very gent
le wine, demure and bashful in the first taste, emerging shyly but quite graci
ously in the second. A little arch, perhaps, in the second taste, and a little
naughty also, teasing the tongue with a trace, just a trace of tannin. Then,
in the after-taste, delightful--consoling and feminine, with a certain blithel
y generous quality that one associates only with the wines of the commune of S
t Julien. Unmistakably this is a St Julien."
He leaned back in his chair, held his hands up level with his chest, and
placed the fingertips carefully together. He was becoming ridiculously Pompou
s, but I thought that some of it was deliberate, simply to mock his host. I f
ound myself waiting rather tensely for him to go on. The girl Louise was ligh
ting a cigarette. Pratt heard the match strike and he turned on her, flaring
suddenly with real anger. "Please!" he said. "Please don't do that! It's a di
sgusting habit, to smoke at table!"
She looked up at him, still holding the burning match in one hand, the b
ig slow eyes settling on his face, resting there a moment, moving away again
, slow and contemptuous. She bent her head and blew out the match, but conti
nued to hold the unlighted cigarette in her fingers.
"I'm sorry, my dear," Pratt said, "but I simply cannot have smoking at tabl
e."
She didn't look at him again.

"Now, let me see--where were we?" he said. "Ah, yes. This wine is from
Bordeaux, from the commune of St Julien, in the district of MŽdoc. So far,
so good. But now we come to the more difficult part--the name of the vineya
rd itself. For in St Julien there are many vineyards, and as our host so ri
ghtly remarked earlier on, there is often not much difference between the w
ine of one and wine of another. But we shall see."
He paused again, closing his eyes. "I am trying to establish the 'growth',"
he said. "If I can do that, it will be half the battle. Now, let me see. This
wine is obviously not from a first-growth vineyard nor even a second. It is not
a great wine. The quality, the--the--what do you call it?--the radiance, the p
ower, is lacking. But a third growth--that it could be. And yet I doubt it. We
know it is a good year--our host has said so--and this is probably flattering i
t a little bit. I must be careful. I must be very careful here."
He picked up his glass and took another small sip.
"Yes," he said, sucking his lips, "I was right. It is a fourth growth. N
ow I am sure of it. A fourth growth from a very good year from a great year,
in fact. And that's what made it taste for a moment like a third--or even a
second-growth wine. Good! That's better! Now we are closing in! What are th
e fourth-growth vineyards in the commune of St Julien?"
Again he paused, took up his glass, and held the rim against that saggin
g, pendulous lower lip of his. Then I saw the tongue shoot out, pink and nar
row, the tip of it dipping into the wine, withdrawing swiftly again--a repul
sive sight. When he lowered the glass, his eyes remained closed, the face co
ncentrated, only the lips moving, sliding over each other like two pieces of
wet, spongy rubber.
"There it is again!" he cried. "Tannin in the middle taste, and the quic
k astringent squeeze upon the tongue. Yes, yes, of course! Now I have it! Th
e wine comes from one of those small vineyards around Beychevelle. I remembe
r now. The Beychevelle district, and the river and the little harbour that h
as silted up so the wine ships can no longer use it. Beychevelle... could it
actually be a Beychevelle itself? No, I don't think so. Not quite. But it i
s somewhere very close. Ch‰teau Talbot? Could it be Talbot? Yes, it could. W
ait one moment."
He sipped the wine again, and out of the side of my eye I noticed Mike S
chofield and how he was leaning farther and farther forward over the table,
his mouth slightly open, his small eyes fixed upon Richard Pratt.
"No. I was wrong. It is not a Talbot. A Talbot comes forward to you just a
little quicker than this one; the fruit is nearer the surface. If it is a '34,
which I believe it is, then it couldn't be Talbot. Well, well. Let me think. It
is not a Beychevelle and it is not a Talbot, and yet--yet it is so close to bo
th of them, so close, that the vineyard must be almost in between. Now, which c
ould that be?"

He hesitated, and we waited, watching his face. Everyone, even Mike's w
ife, was watching him now. I heard the maid put down the dish of vegetables
on the sideboard behind me, gently, so as not to disturb the silence.
"Ah!" he cried. "I have it! Yes, I think I have it!"
For the last time, he sipped the wine. Then, still holding the glass up n
ear his mouth, he turned to Mike and he smiled, a slow, silky smile, and he s
aid, "You know what this is? This is the little Ch‰teau Branaire-Ducru."
Mike sat tight, not moving.
"And the year, 1934."
We all looked at Mike, waiting for him to turn the bottle around in its ba
sket and show the label.
"Is that your final answer?" Mike said.
"Yes, I think so."
"Well, is it or isn't it?"
"Yes, it is."
"What was the name again?"
"Ch‰teau Branaire-Ducru. Pretty little vineyard. Lovely old ch‰teau. Kno
w it quite well. Can't think why I didn't recognize it at once."
"Come on, Daddy," the girl said. "Turn it round and let's have a peek. I
want my two houses."
"Just a minute," Mike said. "Wait just a minute." He was sitting very qu
iet, bewilderedlooking, and his face was becoming puffy and pale, as though
all the force was draining slowly out of him.
"Michael!" his wife called sharply from the other end of the table. "What'
s the matter?"
"Keep out of this, Margaret, will you please."
Richard Pratt was looking at Mike, smiling with his mouth, his eyes smal
l and bright. Mike was not looking at anyone.
"Daddy!" the daughter cried, agonized. "But, Daddy, you don't mean to sa
y he guessed it right!"
"Now, stop worrying, my dear," Mike said. "There's nothing to worry abo
ut."
I think it was more to get away from his family than anything else that Mik
e then turned to Richard Pratt and said, "I'll tell you what, Richard. I think
you and I better slip off into the next room and have a little chat."
"I don't want a little chat," Pratt said. "All I want is to see the label
on that bottle." He knew he was a winner now; he had the bearing, the quiet
arrogance of a winner, and I could see that he was prepared to become thoroug
hly nasty if there was any trouble. "What are you waiting for?" he said to Mi
ke. "Go on and turn it round."
Then this happened: the maid, the tiny, erect figure of the maid in her w
hite-and-black uniform, was standing beside Richard Pratt, holding something

out in her hand. "I believe these are yours, sir," she said.
Pratt glanced around, saw the pair of thin horn-rimmed spectacles that s
he held out to him, and for a moment he hesitated. "Are they? Perhaps they a
re, I don't know."
"Yes, sir, they're yours." The maid was an elderly woman--nearer seventy
than sixty--a faithful family retainer of many years' standing. She put the
spectacles down on the table beside him.
Without thanking her, Pratt took them up and slipped them into his top p
ocket, behind the white handkerchief.
But the maid didn't go away. She remained standing beside and slightly
behind Richard Pratt, and there was something so unusual in her manner and
in the way she stood there, small, motionless and erect, that I for one fou
nd myself watching her with a sudden apprehension. Her old grey face had a
frosty, determined look, the lips were compressed, the little chin was out,
and the hands were clasped together tight before her. The curious cap on h
er head and the flash of white down the front of her uniform made her seem
like some tiny, ruffled, white-breasted bird.
"You left them in Mr Schofield's study," she said. Her voice was unnatura
lly, deliberately polite. "On top of the green filing cabinet in his study, s
ir, when you happened to go in there by yourself before dinner."
It took a few moments for the full meaning of her words to penetrate, an
d in the silence that followed I became aware of Mike and how he was slowly
drawing himself up in his chair, and the colour coming to his face, and the
eyes opening wide, and the curl of the mouth, and the dangerous little patch
of whiteness beginning to spread around the area of the nostrils.
"Now, Michael!" his wife said. "Keep calm now, Michael dear! Keep cal
m!"

Lamb to the Slaughter
THE room was warm and clean, the curtains drawn, the two table lamps aligh
t--hers and the one by the empty chair opposite. On the sideboard behind h
er, two tall glasses, soda water, whisky. Fresh ice cubes in the Thermos b
ucket.
Mary Maloney was waiting for her husband to come home from work.
Now and again she would glance up at the clock, but without anxiety, me
rely to please herself with the thought that each minute gone by made it ne
arer the time when he would come. There was a slow smiling air about her, a
nd about everything she did. The drop of the head as she bent over her sewi
ng was curiously tranquil. Her skin--for this was her sixth month with chil

d--had acquired a wonderful translucent quality, the mouth was soft, and th
e eyes, with their new placid look, seemed larger, darker than before.
When the clock said ten minutes to five, she began to listen, and a few
moments later, punctually as always, she heard the tyres on the gravel outsi
de, and the car door slamming, the footsteps passing the window, the key tur
ning in the lock. She laid aside her sewing, stood up, and went forward to k
iss him as he came in.
"Hullo, darling," she said.
"Hullo," he answered. She took his coat and hung it in the closet. Then s
he walked over and made the drinks, a strongish one for him, a weak one for h
erself; and soon she was back again in her chair with the sewing, and he in t
he other, opposite, holding the tall glass with both his hands, rocking it so
the ice cubes tinkled against the side.
For her, this was always a blissful time of day. She knew he didn't want
to speak much until the first drink was finished, and she, on her side, was
content to sit quietly, enjoying his company after the long hours alone in
the house. She loved to luxuriate in the presence of this man, and to feel-almost as a sunbather feels the sun that warm male glow that came out of him
to her when they were alone together. She loved him for the way he sat loos
ely in a chair, for the way he came in a door, or moved slowly across the ro
om with long strides. She loved the intent, far look in his eyes when they r
ested on her, the funny shape of the mouth, and especially the way he remain
ed silent about his tiredness, sitting still with himself until the whisky h
ad taken some of it away.
"Tired, darling?"
"Yes," he said. "I'm tired." And as he spoke, he did an unusual thing. H
e lifted his glass and drained it in one swallow although there was still ha
lf of it, at least half of it, left. She wasn't really watching him but she
knew what he had done because she heard the ice cubes falling back against t
he bottom of the empty glass when he lowered his arm. He paused a moment, le
aning forward in the chair, then he got up and went slowly over to fetch him
self another.
"I'll get it!" she cried, jumping up.
"Sit down," he said.
When he came back, she noticed that the new drink was dark amber with t
he quantity of whisky in it.
"Darling, shall I get your slippers?"
She watched him as he began to sip the dark yellow drink, and she could se
e little oily swirls in the liquid because it was so strong.
"I think it's a shame," she said, "that when a policeman gets to be as sen
ior as you, they keep him walking about on his feet all day long."
He didn't answer, so she bent her head again and went on with her sewing;

but each time he lifted the drink to his lips, she heard the ice cubes clinkin
g against the side of the glass.
"Darling," she said. "Would you like me to get you some cheese? I haven
't made any supper because it's Thursday."
"No," he said.
"If you're too tired to eat out," she went on, "it's still not too late. The
re's plenty of meat and stuff in the freezer, and you can have it right here and
not even move out of the chair."
Her eyes waited on him for an answer, a smile, a little nod, but he made n
o sign.
"Anyway," she went on, "I'll get you some cheese and crackers first."
"I don't want it," he said.
She moved uneasily in her chair, the large eyes still watching his face.
"But you must have supper. I can easily do it here. I'd like to do it. We can
have lamb chops. Or pork. Anything you want. Everything's in the freezer."
"Forget it," he said.
"But, darling, you must eat! I'll fix it anyway, and then you can have it or
not, as you like."
She stood up and placed her sewing on the table by the lamp.
"Sit down," he said. "Just for a minute, sit down."
It wasn't till then that she began to get frightened.
"Go on," he said. "Sit down."
She lowered herself back slowly into the chair, watching him all the tim
e with those large, bewildered eyes. He had finished the second drink and wa
s staring down into the glass frowning.
"Listen," he said, "I've got something to tell you."
"What is it, darling? 'What's the matter?"
He had become absolutely motionless, and he kept his head down so that t
he light from the lamp beside him fell across the upper part of his face, le
aving the chin and mouth in shadow. She noticed there was a little muscle mo
ving near the corner of his left eye.
"This is going to be a bit of a shock to you, I'm afraid," he said. "But I
've thought about it a good deal and I've decided the only thing to do is tell
you right away. I hope you won't blame me too much."
And he told her. It didn't take long, four or five minutes at most, and sh
e sat very still through it all, watching him with a kind of dazed horror as h
e went further and further away from her with each word.
"So there it is," he added. "And I know it's kind of a bad time to be tel
ling you, but there simply wasn't any other way. Of course I'll give you mone
y and see you're looked after. But there needn't really be any fuss. I hope n
ot anyway. It wouldn't be very good for my job."
Her first instinct was not to believe any of it, to reject it all. It occu

rred to her that perhaps he hadn't even spoken, that she herself had imagined
the whole thing. Maybe, if she went about her business and acted as though she
hadn't been listening, then later, when she sort of woke up again, she might
find none of it had ever happened.
"I'll get the supper," she managed to whisper, and this time he didn't stop
her.
When she walked across the room she couldn't feel her feet touching the fl
oor. She couldn't feel anything at all--except a slight nausea and a desire to
vomit. Everything was automatic now--down the stairs to the cellar, the light
switch, the deep freeze, the hand inside the cabinet taking hold of the first
object it met. She lifted it out, and looked at it. It was wrapped in paper,
so she took off the paper and looked at it again.
A leg of lamb.
All right then, they would have lamb for supper. She carried it upstairs
, holding the thin bone-end of it with both her hands, and as she went throu
gh the living-room, she saw him standing over by the window with his back to
her, and she stopped.
"For God's sake," he said, hearing her, but not turning round. "Don't mak
e supper for me. I'm going out."
At that point, Mary Maloney simply walked up behind him and without any
pause she swung the big frozen leg of lamb high in the air and brought it
down as hard as she could on the back of his head.
She might just as well have hit him with a steel club.
She stepped back a pace, waiting, and the funny thing was that he remaine
d standing there for at least four or five seconds, gently swaying. Then he c
rashed to the carpet.
The violence of the crash, the noise, the small table overturning, helped
bring her out of the shock. She came out slowly, feeling cold and surprised, a
nd she stood for a while blinking at the body, still holding the ridiculous pi
ece of meat tight with both hands.
All right, she told herself. So I've killed him.
It was extraordinary, now, how clear her mind became all of a sudden. S
he began thinking very fast. As the wife of a detective, she knew quite wel
l what the penalty would be. That was fine. It made no difference to her. I
n fact, it would be a relief. On the other hand, what about the child? What
were the laws about murderers with unborn children? Did they kill them bot
h--mother and child? Or did they wait until the tenth month? What did they do?
Mary Maloney didn't know. And she certainly wasn't prepared to take a c
hance.
She carried the meat into the kitchen, placed it in a pan, turned the ove
n on high, and shoved it inside. Then she washed her hands and ran upstairs t
o the bedroom. She sat down before the mirror, tidied her face, touched up he

r lips and face. She tried a smile. It came out rather peculiar. She tried ag
ain.
"Hullo Sam," she said brightly, aloud.
The voice sounded peculiar too.
"I want some potatoes please, Sam. Yes, and I think a can of peas."
That was better. Both the smile and the voice were coming out better now
. She rehearsed it several times more. Then she ran downstairs, took her coa
t, went out the back door, down the garden, into the street.
It wasn't six o'clock yet and the lights were still on in the grocery shop.
"Hullo Sam," she said brightly, smiling at the man behind the counter.
"Why, good evening, Mrs Maloney. How're you?"
"I want some potatoes please, Sam. Yes, and I think a can of peas."
The man turned and reached up behind him on the shelf for the peas.
"Patrick's decided he's tired and doesn't want to eat out tonight," she
told him. "We usually go out Thursdays, you know, and now he's caught me wit
hout any vegetables in the house."
"Then how about meat, Mrs Maloney?"
"No, I've got meat, thanks. I got a nice leg of lamb, from the freezer."
"ih.
"I don't much like cooking it frozen, Sam, but I'm taking a chance on it thi
s time. You think it'll be all right?"
"Personally," the grocer said, "I don't believe it makes any difference. Y
ou want these Idaho potatoes?"
"Oh yes, that'll be fine. Two of those."
"Anything else?" The grocer cocked his head on one side, looking at he
r pleasantly. "How about afterwards? What you going to give him for afterw
ards?"
"Well what would you suggest, Sam?"
The man glanced around his shop. "How about a nice big slice of cheesec
ake? I know he likes that."
"Perfect," she said. "He loves it."
And when it was all wrapped and she had paid she put on her brightest s
mile and said, "Thank you, Sam. Good night."
"Good night, Mrs Maloney. And thank you."
And now, she told herself as she hurried back, all she was doing now, s
he was returning home to her husband and he was waiting for his supper; and
she must cook it good, and make it as tasty as possible because the poor m
an was tired; and if, when she entered the house, she happened to find anyt
hing unusual, or tragic, or terrible, then naturally it would be a shock an
d she'd become frantic with grief and horror. Mind you, she wasn't expectin
g to find anything. She was just going home with the vegetables. Mrs Patric
k Maloney going home with the vegetables on Thursday evening to cook supper

for her husband.
That's the way, she told herself. Do everything right and natural. Keep thi
ngs absolutely natural and there'll be no need for any acting at all.
Therefore, when she entered the kitchen by the back door, she was hummin
g a little tune to herself and smiling.
"Patrick!" she called. "How are you darling?"
She put the parcel down on the table and went through into the living-r
oom; and when she saw him lying there on the floor with his legs doubled up
and one arm twisted back underneath his body, it really was rather a shock
. All the old love and longing for him welled up inside her, and she ran ov
er to him, knelt down beside him, and began to cry her heart out. It was ea
sy. No acting was necessary.
A few minutes later she got up and went to the phone. She knew the numb
er of the police station, and when the man at the other end answered, she c
ried to him, "Quick! Come quick! Patrick's dead!"
"Who's speaking?"
"Mrs Maloney. Mrs Patrick Maloney."
"You mean Patrick Maloney's dead?"
"I think so," she sobbed. "He's lying on the floor and I think he's dead."
"Be right over," the man said.
The car came over quickly, and when she opened the front door, two poli
cemen walked in. She knew them both--she knew nearly all the men at that pr
ecinct--and she fell right into Jack Noonan's arms, weeping hysterically. H
e put her gently into a chair, then went over to join the other one, who wa
s called O'Malley, kneeling by the body.
"Is he dead?" she cried.
"I'm afraid he is. What happened?"
Briefly, she told her story about going out to the grocer and coming ba
ck to find him on the floor. While she was talking, crying and talking, Noo
nan discovered a small patch of congealed blood on the dead man's head. He
showed it to O'Malley who got up at once and hurried to the phone.
Soon, other men began to come into the house. First a doctor, then two
detectives, one of whom she knew by name. Later, a police photographer arri
ved and took pictures, and a man who knew about fingerprints. There was a g
reat deal of whispering and muttering beside the corpse, and the detectives
kept asking her a lot of questions. But they always treated her kindly. Sh
e told her story again, this time right from the beginning, when Patrick ha
d come in, and she was sewing, and he was tired, so tired he hadn't wanted
to go out for supper. She told how she'd put the meat in the oven--"it's th
ere now, cooking"--and how she'd slipped out to the grocer for vegetables,
and come back to find him lying on the floor.
"Which grocer?" one of the detectives asked.

She told him, and he turned and whispered something to the other detecti
ve who immediately went outside into the street.
In fifteen minutes he was back with a page of notes, and there was more
whispering, and through her sobbing she heard a few of the whispered phrases
"... acted quite normal very cheerful... wanted to give him a good supper..
. peas... cheesecake... impossible that she..
After a while, the photographer and the doctor departed and two other m
en came in and took the corpse away on a stretcher. Then the fingerprint ma
n went away. The two detectives remained, and so did the two policemen. The
y were exceptionally nice to her, and Jack Noonan asked if she wouldn't rat
her go somewhere else, to her sister's house perhaps, or to his own wife wh
o would take care of her and put her up for the night.
No, she said. She didn't feel she could move even a yard at the moment. W
ould they mind awfully if she stayed just where she was until she felt better
? She didn't feel too good at the moment, she really didn't.
Then hadn't she better lie down on the bed? Jack Noonan asked.
No, she said, she'd like to stay right where she was, in this chair. A littl
e later perhaps, when she felt better, she would move.
So they left her there while they went about their business, searching
the house. Occasionally one of the detectives asked her another question. S
ometimes Jack Noonan spoke to her gently as he passed by. Her husband, he t
old her, had been killed by a blow on the back of the head administered wit
h a heavy blunt instrument, almost certainly a large piece of metal. They w
ere looking for the weapon. The murderer may have taken it with him, but on
the other hand he may've thrown it away or hidden it somewhere on the prem
ises.
"It's the old story," he said. "Get the weapon, and you've got the man."
Later, one of the detectives came up and sat beside her. Did she know,
he asked, of anything in the house that could've been used as the weapon? W
ould she mind having a look around to see if anything was missing a very bi
g spanner for example, or a heavy metal vase.
They didn't have any heavy metal vases, she said.
"Or a big spanner?"
She didn't think they had a big spanner. But there might be some things li
ke that in the garage.
The search went on. She knew that there were other policemen in the gard
en all around the house. She could hear their footsteps on the gravel outsid
e, and sometimes she saw the flash of a torch through a chink in the curtain
s. It began to get late, nearly nine she noticed by the clock on the mantel.
The four men searching the rooms seemed to be growing weary, a trifle exasp
erated.
"Jack," she said, the next time Sergeant Noonan went by. "Would you mi

nd giving me a drink?"
"Sure I'll give you a drink. You mean this whisky?"
"Yes, please. But just a small one. It might make me feel better."
He handed her the glass. "Why don't you have one yourself," she said. "
You must be awfully tired. Please do. You've been very good to me."
"Well," he answered. "It's not strictly allowed, but I might take just a dr
op to keep me going."
One by one the others came in and were persuaded to take a little nip o
f whisky. They stood around rather awkwardly with the drinks in their hands
, uncomfortable in her presence, trying to say consoling things to her. Ser
geant Noonan wandered into the kitchen, came out quickly and said, "Look, M
rs Maloney. You know that oven of yours is still on, and the meat still ins
ide."
"Oh dear me!" she cried. "So it is!"
"I better turn it off for you, hadn't I?"
"Will you do that, Jack. Thank you so much."
When the sergeant returned the second time, she looked at him with her la
rge, dark, tearful eyes. "Jack Noonan," she said.
"Yes?"
"Would you do me a small favour--you and these others?"
"We can try, Mrs Maloney."
"Well," she said. "Here you all are, and good friends of dear Patrick's
too, and helping to catch the man who killed him. You must be terribly hungr
y by now because it's long past your supper time, and I know Patrick would n
ever forgive me, God bless his soul, if I allowed you to remain in his house
without offering you decent hospitality. Why don't you eat up that lamb tha
t's in the oven? It'll be cooked just right by now."
"Wouldn't dream of it," Sergeant Noonan said.
"Please," she begged. "Please eat it. Personally I couldn't touch a thing,
certainly not what's been in the house when he was here. But it's all right f
or you. It'd be a favour to me if you'd eat it up. Then you can go on with you
r work again afterwards."
There was a good deal of hesitating among the four policemen, but they
were clearly hungry, and in the end they were persuaded to go into the ki
tchen and help themselves. The woman stayed where she was, listening to th
em through the open door, and she could hear them speaking among themselve
s, their voices thick and sloppy because their mouths were full of meat.
"Have some more, Charlie?"
"No. Better not finish it."
"She wants us to finish it. She said so. Be doing her a favour."
"Okay then. Give me some more."
"That is the hell of a big club the guy must've used to hit poor Patrick,

" one of them was saying. "The doc says his skull was smashed all to pieces j
ust like from a sledge-hammer."
"That is why it ought to be easy to find."
"Exactly what I say."
"Whoever done it, they're not going to be carrying a thing like that arou
nd with them longer than they need."
One of them belched. "Personally, I think it's right here on the premises."
"Probably right under our very noses. What you think, Jack?"
And in the other room, Mary Maloney began to giggle.

Man from the South
IT was getting on towards six o'clock so I thought I'd buy myself a beer and
go out and sit in a deckchair by the swimming pool and have a little evenin
g sun.
I went to the bar and got the beer and carried it outside and wandered do
wn the garden towards the pool.
It was a fine garden with lawns and beds of azaleas and tall coconut pal
ms, and the wind was blowing strongly through the tops of the palm trees, ma
king the leaves hiss and crackle as though they were on fire. I could see th
e clusters of big brown nuts hanging down underneath the leaves.
There were plenty of deck chairs around the swimming pool and there wer
e white tables and huge brightly coloured umbrellas and sunburned men and w
omen sitting around in bathing suits. In the pool itself there were three o
r four girls and about a dozen boys, all splashing about and making a lot o
f noise and throwing a large rubber ball at one another.
I stood watching them. The girls were English girls from the hotel. Th
e boys I didn't know about, but they sounded American, and I thought they
were probably naval cadets who'd come ashore from the US naval training ve
ssel which had arrived in harbour that morning.
I went over and sat down under a yellow umbrella where there were four
empty seats, and I poured my beer and settled back comfortably with a cigar
ette.
It was very pleasant sitting there in the sunshine with beer and cigarette.
It was pleasant to sit and watch the bathers splashing about in the green wate
r.
The American sailors were getting on nicely with the English girls. They
'd reached the stage where they were diving under the water and tipping them
up by their legs.
Just then I noticed a small, oldish man walking briskly around the edge

of the pool. He was immaculately dressed in a white suit and he walked very
quickly with little bouncing strides, pushing himself high up on to his toes
with each step. He had on a large creamy Panama hat, and he came bouncing a
long the side of the pool, looking at the people and the chairs.
He stopped beside me and smiled, showing two rows of very small, uneven
teeth, slightly tarnished. I smiled back.
"Excuse pleess, but may I sit here?"
"Certainly," I said. "Go ahead."
He bobbed around to the back of the chair and inspected it for safety, th
en he sat down and crossed his legs. His white buckskin shoes had little hole
s punched all over them for ventilation.
"A fine evening," he said. "They are all evenings fine here in Jamaica."
I couldn't tell if the accent were Italian or Spanish, but I felt fairly sure
he was some sort of a South American. And old too, when you saw him close. P
robably around sixty-eight or seventy.
"Yes," I said. "It is wonderful here, isn't it."
"And who, might I ask, are all dese? Dese is no hotel people." He was poin
ting at the bathers in the pool.
"I think they're American sailors," I told him. "They're Americans who are
learning to be sailors."
"Of course dey are Americans. Who else in de world is going to make a
s much noise as dat? You are not American no?"
"No," I said. "I am not."
Suddenly one of the American cadets was standing in front of us. He was
dripping wet from the pool and one of the English girls was standing there
with him.
"Are these chairs taken?" he said.
"No," I answered.
"Mind if I sit down?"
"Go ahead."
"Thanks," he said. He had a towel in his hand and when he sat down he unr
olled it and produced a pack of cigarettes and a lighter. He offered the ciga
rettes to the girl and she refused; then he offered them to me and I took one
. The little man said, "Tank you, no, but I tink I have a cigar." He pulled o
ut a crocodile case and got himself a cigar, then he produced a knife which h
ad a small scissors in it and he snipped the end off the cigar.
"Here, let me give you a light." The American boy held up his lighter.
"Dat will not work in dis wind."
"Sure it'll work. It always works." The little man removed his unlighted
cigar from his mouth, cocked his head on one side and looked at the boy.
"All-ways?" he said slowly.
"Sure, it never fails. Not with me anyway."

The little man's head was still cocked over on one side and he was still w
atching the boy. "Well, well. So you say dis famous lighter it never fails. Is
s dat you say?"
"Sure," the boy said. "That's right." He was about nineteen or twenty wit
h a long freckled face and a rather sharp birdlike nose. His chest was not ve
ry sunburned and there were freckles there too, and a few wisps of pale-reddi
sh hair. He was holding the lighter in his right hand, ready to flip the whee
l. "It never fails," he said, smiling now because he was purposely exaggerati
ng his little boast. "I promise you it never fails."
"One momint, pleess." The hand that held the cigar came up high, palm ou
tward, as though it were stopping traffic. "Now juss one momint." He had a c
uriously soft, toneless voice and he kept looking at the boy all the time.
"Shall we not perhaps make a little bet on dat?" He smiled at the boy. "Sh
all we not make a little bet on whether your lighter lights?"
"Sure, I'll bet," the boy said. "Why not?"
"You like to bet?"
"Sure, I'll always bet."
The man paused and examined his cigar, and I must say I didn't much like
the way he was behaving. It seemed he was already trying to make something
out of this, and to embarrass the boy, and at the same time I had the feelin
g he was relishing a private little secret all his own.
He looked up again at the boy and said slowly, "I like to bet, too. Why w
e don't have a good bet on dis ting? A good big bet."
"Now wait a minute," the boy said. "I can't do that. But I'll bet you a quar
ter. I'll even bet you a dollar, or whatever it is over here--some shillings, I
guess."
The little man waved his hand again. "Listen to me. Now we have some f
un. We make a bet. Den we go up to my room here in de hotel where iss no w
ind and I bet you you cannot light dis famous lighter of yours ten times r
unning without missing once."
"I'll bet I can," the boy said.
"All right. Good. We make a bet, yes?"
"Sure, I'll bet you a buck."
"No, no I make you a very good bet. I am rich man and I am sporting man
also. Listen to me. Outside de hotel iss my car. Iss very fine car. American
car from your country. Cadillac-- "Hey, now. Wait a minute." The boy leaned
back in his deck-chair and he laughed. "I can't put up that sort of propert
y. This is crazy."
"Not crazy at all. You strike lighter successfully ten times running and C
adillac is yours. You like to have dis Cadillac, yes?"
"Sure, I'd like to have a Cadillac." The boy was still grinning.
"All right. Fine. We make a bet and I put up my Cadillac."

"And what do I put up?" The little man carefully removed the red band fr
om his still unlighted cigar. "I never ask you, my friend, to bet something
you cannot afford. You understand?"
"Then what do I bet?"
"I make it very easy for you, yes?"
"Okay. You make it easy."
"Some small ting you can afford to give away, and if you did happen to l
ose it you would not feel too bad. Right?"
"Such as what?"
"Such as, perhaps, de little finger on your left hand."
"My what?" The boy stopped grinning.
"Yes. Why not? You win, you take de car. You boss, I take de finger."
"I don't get it. How d'you mean, you take the finger?"
"I chop it off."
"Jumping jeepers! That's a crazy bet. I think I'll just make it a dollar."
The little man leaned back, spread out his hands palms upwards and gave a
tiny contemptuous shrug of the shoulders, "Well, well, well," he said. "I do
not understand. You say it lights but you will not bet. Den we forget it, ye
s?"
The boy sat quite still, staring at the bathers in the pool. Then he reme
mbered suddenly he hadn't lighted his cigarette. He put it between his lips,
cupped his hands around the lighter and flipped the wheel. The wick lighted a
nd burned with a small, steady, yellow flame and the way he held his hands th
e wind didn't get to it at all. "Could I have a light, too?" I said.
"God, I'm sorry, I forgot you didn't have one."
I held out my hand for the lighter, but he stood up and came over to do it
for me.
"Thank you," I said, and he returned to his seat.
"You having a good time?" I asked.
"Fine," he answered. "It's pretty nice here."
There was a silence then, and I could see that the little man had succeed
ed in disturbing the boy with his absurd proposal. He was sitting there very
still, and it was obvious that a small tension was beginning to build up insi
de him. Then he started shifting about in his seat, and rubbing his chest, an
d stroking the back of his neck, and finally he placed both hands on his knee
s and began tap-tapping with his fingers against the kneecaps. Soon he was ta
pping with one of his feet as well.
"Now just let me check up on this bet of yours," he said at last. "You say
we go up to your room and if I make this lighter light ten times running I win
a Cadillac. If it misses just once then I forfeit the little finger of my left
hand. Is that right?
"Certainly. Dat is de bet. But I tink you are afraid."

"What do we do if I lose? Do I have to hold my finger out while you chop
it off?"
"Oh, no! Dat would be no good. And you might be tempted to refuse to ho
ld it out. What I should do I should tie one of your hands to de table befo
re we started and I should stand dere with a knife ready to go chop de momi
nt your lighter missed."
"What year is the Cadillac?" the boy asked.
"Excuse. I not understand."
"What year--how old is the Cadillac?"
"Ah! How old? Yes. It is last year. Quite new car. But I see you are not
betting man. Americans never are."
The boy paused for just a moment and he glanced first at the English girl,
then at me. "Yes," he said sharply. "I'll bet you."
"Good!" The little man clapped his hands together quietly, once. "Fine,"
he said. "We do it now. And you, sir," he turned to me, "you would perhaps
be good enough to, what you call it, to to referee." He had pale, almost col
ourless eyes with tiny bright black pupils.
"Well," I said. "I think it's a crazy bet. I don't think I like it very much."
"Nor do I," said the English girl. It was the first time she'd spoken. "I think
it's a stupid, ridiculous bet."
"Are you serious about cutting off this boy's finger if he loses?" I said.
"Certainly I am. Also about giving him Cadillac if he win. Come now. W
e go to my room."
He stood up. "You like to put on some clothes first?" he said.
"No," the boy answered. "I'll come like this." Then he turned to me. "I'd
consider it a favour if you'd come along and referee."
"All right," I said. "I'll come along, but I don't like the bet."
"You come too," he said to the girl. "You come and watch."
The little man led the way back through the garden to the hotel. He was
animated now, and excited, and that seemed to make him bounce up higher th
an ever on his toes as he walked along.
"I live in annexe," he said. "You like to see car first? Iss just here."
He took us to where we could see the front driveway of the hotel and he
stopped and pointed to a sleek pale-green Cadillac parked close by.
"Dere she iss. De green one. You like?"
"Say, that's a nice car," the boy said.
"All right. Now we go up and see if you can win her."
We followed him into the annexe and up one flight of stairs. He unlock
ed his door and we all trooped into what was a large pleasant double bedro
om. There was a woman's dressing-gown lying across the bottom of one of th
e beds.
"First," he said, "we 'ave a little Martini."

The drinks were on a small table in the far corner, all ready to be mix
ed, and there was a shaker and ice and plenty of glasses. He began to make
the Martini, but meanwhile he'd rung the bell and now there was a knock on
the door and a coloured maid came in.
"Ah!" he said, putting down the bottle of gin, taking a wallet from his
pocket and pulling out a pound note. "You will do something for me flow, ple
ess." He gave the maid the pound.
"You keep dat," he said. "And now we are going to play a little game in
here and I want you to go off and find for me two no tree tings. I want so
me nails, I want a hammer, and I want a chopping knife, a butcher's choppin
g knife which you can borrow from de kitchen. You can get, yes?"
"A chopping knife!" The maid opened her eyes wide and clasped her hand
s in front of her. "You mean a real chopping knife?"
"Yes, yes, of course. Come on now, pleess. You can find dose tings surel
y for me."
"Yes, sir, I'll try, sir. Surely I'll try to get them." And she went.
The little man handed round the Martinis. We stood there and sipped them,
the boy with the long freckled face and the pointed nose, bare-bodied except
for a pair of faded brown bathing shorts; the English girl, a large-boned fa
ir-haired girl wearing a pale blue bathing suit, who watched the boy over the
top of her glass all the time; the little man with the colourless eyes stand
ing there in his immaculate white suit drinking his Martini and looking at th
e girl in her pale blue bathing dress. I didn't know what to make of it all.
The man seemed serious about the bet and he seemed serious about the business
of cutting off the finger. But hell, what if the boy lost? Then we'd have to
rush him to the hospital in the Cadillac that he hadn't won. That would be a
fine thing. Now wouldn't that be a really fine thing? It would be a damn sil
ly unnecessary thing so far as I could see.
"Don't you think this is rather a silly bet?" I said. "I think it's a fine b
et," the boy answered. He had already downed one large Martini.
"I think it's a stupid, ridiculous bet," the girl said. "What'll happen if you
lose?"
"It won't matter. Come to think of it, I can't remember ever in my life ha
ving had any use for the little finger on my left hand. Here he is." The boy t
ook hold of the finger. "Here he is and he hasn't ever done a thing for me yet
. So why shouldn't I bet him? I think it's a fine bet."
The little man smiled and picked up the shaker and refilled our glasses.
"Before we begin," he said, "I will present to de--to de referee de key o
f de car." He produced a car key from his pocket and gave it to me. "De paper
s," he said, "de owning papers and insurance are in de pocket of de car."
Then the coloured maid came in again. In one hand she carried a small c
hopper, the kind used by butchers for chopping meat bones, and in the other

a hammer and a bag of nails.
"Good! You get dem all. Tank you, tank you. Now you can go." He waited
until the maid had closed the door, then he put the implements on one of th
e beds and said, "Now we prepare ourselves, yes?" And to the boy, "Help me,
pleess, with dis table. We carry it out a little."
It was the usual kind of hotel writing desk, just a plain rectangular tabl
e about four feet by three with a blotting pad, ink, pens and paper. They carr
ied it out into the room away from the wall, and removed the writing things.
"And now," he said, "a chair." He picked up a chair and placed it beside
the table. He was very brisk and very animated, like a person organizing ga
mes at a children's party. "And now de nails. I must put in de nails." He fe
tched the nails and he began to hammer them into the top of the table.
We stood there, the boy, the girl, and I, holding Martinis in our hands,
watching the little man at work. We watched him hammer two nails into the t
able, about six inches apart. He didn't hammer them right home; he allowed a
small part of each one to stick up. Then he tested them for firmness with h
is fingers.
Anyone would think the son of a bitch had done this before, I told myse
lf. He never hesitates. Table, nails, hammer, kitchen chopper. He knows exa
ctly what he needs and how to arrange it.
"And now," he said, "all we want is some string." He found some string. "A
ll right, at last we are ready. Will you pleess to sit here at de table?" he s
aid to the boy.
The boy put his glass away and sat down.
"Now place de left hand between dese two nails. De nails are only so I ca
n tie your hand in place. All right, good. Now I tie your hand secure to de t
able--so."
He wound the string around the boy's wrist, then several times around the
wide part of the hand, then he fastened it tight to the nails. He made a goo
d job of it and when he'd finished there wasn't any question about the boy be
ing able to draw his hand away. But he could move his fingers. "Now pleess, c
lench de fist, all except for de little finger. You must leave de little fing
er sticking out, lying on de table."
"Ex-cellent! Ex-cellent! Now we are ready. Wid your right hand you man
ipulate de lighter. But one moment, pleess."
He skipped over to the bed and picked up the chopper. He came back and
stood beside the table with the chopper in his hand.
"We are all ready?" he said. "Mister referee, you must say to begin."
The English girl was standing there in her pale blue bathing costume righ
t behind the boy's chair. She was just standing there, not saying anything. T
he boy was sitting quite still holding the lighter in his right hand, looking
at the chopper. The little man was looking at me.

"Are you ready?" I asked the boy.
"I'm ready."
"And you?" to the little man.
"Quite ready," he said and he lifted the chopper up in the air and held i
t there about two feet above the boy's finger, ready to chop. The boy watched
it, but didn't flinch and his mouth didn't move at all. He merely raised his
eyebrows and frowned.
"All right," I said. "Go ahead."
The boy said, "Will you please count aloud the number of times I light it.
"
"Yes," I said. "I'll do that."
With his thumb he raised the top of the lighter, and again with the thum
b he gave the wheel a sharp flick. The flint sparked and the wick caught fir
e and burned with a small yellow flame.
"One!" I called.
He didn't blow the flame out; he closed the top of the lighter on it and h
e waited for perhaps five seconds before opening it again.
He flicked the wheel very strongly and once more there was a small flam
e burning on the wick.
"Two!"
No one else said anything. The boy kept his eyes on the lighter. The littl
e man held the chopper up in the air and he too was watching the lighter.
"Three!"
"Four!"
"Five!"
"Six!"
"Seven!" Obviously it was one of those lighters that worked. The flint
gave a big spark and the wick was the right length. I watched the thumb sna
pping the top down on to the flame. Then a pause. Then the thumb raising th
e top once more. This was an all-thumb operation. The thumb did everything.
I took a breath, ready to say eight. The thumb flicked the wheel. The flin
t sparked. The little flame appeared.
"Eight!" I said, and as I said it the door opened. We all turned and we
saw a woman standing in the doorway, a small, black-haired woman, rather o
ld, who stood there for about two seconds then rushed forward, shouting, "C
arlos! Carlos!" She grabbed his wrist, took the chopper from him, threw it
on the bed, took hold of the little man by the lapels of his white suit and
began shaking him very vigorously, talking to him fast and loud and fierce
ly all the time in some Spanish-sounding language. She shook him so fast yo
u couldn't see him any more. He became a faint, misty, quickly moving outli
ne, like the spokes of a turning wheel.
Then she slowed down and the little man came into view again and she hau

led him across the room and pushed him backwards on to one of the beds. He s
at on the edge of it blinking his eyes and testing his head to see if it wou
ld still turn on his neck.
"I am sorry," the woman said. "I am so terribly sorry that this should ha
ppen." She spoke almost perfect English.
"It is too bad," she went on. "I suppose it is really my fault. For ten m
inutes I leave him alone to go and have my hair washed and I come back and he
is at it again." She looked sorry and deeply concerned.
The boy was untying his hand from the table. The English girl and I stood
there and said nothing.
"He is a menace," the woman said. "Down where we live at home he has t
aken altogether forty-seven fingers from different people, and has lost el
even cars. In the end they threatened to have him put away somewhere. That
's why I brought him up here."
"We were only having a little bet," mumbled the little man from the bed.
"I suppose he bet you a car," the woman said. "Yes," the boy answered. "
A Cadillac."
"He has no car. It's mine. And that makes it worse," she said, "that he
should bet you when he has nothing to bet with. I am ashamed and very sorry
about it all." She seemed an awfully nice woman.
"Well," I said, "then here's the key of your car." I put it on the table.
"We were only having a little bet," mumbled the little man.
"He hasn't anything left to bet with," the woman said. "He hasn't a thing
in the world. Not a thing. As a matter of fact I myself won it all from him
a long while ago. It took time, a lot of time, and it was hard work, but I wo
n it all in the end." She looked up at the boy and she smiled, a slow sad smi
le, and she came over and put out a hand to take the key from the table.
I can see it now, that hand of hers; it had only one finger on it, The Sol
dier I T was one of those nights that made him feel he knew what it was like t
o be a blind man; not the shadow of an image for his eyes to discern, not even
the forms of the trees visible against the sky.
Out of the darkness he became aware of small rustling noises in the hedge
, the breathing of a horse some distance away in the field, the soft thud of
a hoof as it moved its foot; and once he heard the rush of a bird flying past
him low overhead.
"Jock," he said, speaking loud. "We'll go home now." And he turned and
began to walk back up the slope of the lane, the dog pulling ahead, showing
the way in the dark.
It must be nearly midnight, he thought. That meant that soon it would
be tomorrow. Tomorrow was worse than today. Tomorrow was the worst of al
l because it was going to become today--and today was now.
Today had not been very nice, especially that business with the splinter.

Stop it, he told himself. There isn't any sense thinking about it. It d
oesn't do anyone any good thinking about things like that. Think about some
thing else for a change. You can kick out a dangerous thought, you know, if
you put another in its place. Go right back as far as you can go. Let's ha
ve some memories of sweet days. The seaside holidays in the summer, wet san
d and red buckets and shrimping nets and the slippery seaweedy rocks and th
e small clear pools and sea anemones and snails and mussels and sometimes o
ne grey translucent shrimp hovering deep down in the beautiful green water.
But how could that splinter have got into the sole of his foot without him
feeling it?
It is not important. Do you remember hunting for cowries along the marg
in of the tide, each one so fine and perfect it became a precious jewel to
be held in the hand all the way home; and the little orange-coloured scallo
ps, the pearly oyster shells, the tiny bits of emerald glass, a live hermit
crab, a cockle, the spine of a skate, and once, but never to be forgotten,
the dry seawashed jawbone of a human being with teeth in it, white and won
derful among the shells and pebbles. Oh Mummy, look what I've found! Look,
Mummy, look!
But to go back to the splinter. She had really been rather unpleasant about
that.
"What do you mean, you didn't notice?" she had asked, scornful.
"I just didn't notice, that's all."
"I suppose you're going to tell me if I stick a pin into your foot you won't f
eel it?"
"I didn't say that."
And then she had jabbed him suddenly in the ankle with the pin she had be
en using to take out the splinter, and he hadn't been watching so he didn't k
now about it till she had cried out in a kind of horror. And when he had look
ed down, the pin was sticking into the flesh all by itself behind the anklebo
ne, almost half of it buried. "Take it out," he had said. "You can poison som
eone like that."
"You mean you can't feel it?"
"Take it out, will you?"
"You mean it doesn't hurt?"
"The pain is terrible. Take it out."
"What's the matter with you?"
"I said the pain is terrible. Didn't you hear me?"
Why did they do things like that to him?
When I was down beside the sea, a wooden spade they gave to me, to dig
the sandy shore. My holes were empty as a cup, and every time the sea cam
e up, till it could come no more.
A year ago the doctor had said, "Shut your eyes. Now tell me whether I'm

pushing this toe up or down."
"Up," he had said.
"And now?"
"Down. No, up. I think it's up."
It was peculiar that a neuro-surgeon should want to play with his toes.
"Did I get them all right, doctor?"
"You did very well."
But that was a year ago. He had felt pretty good a year ago. The sort of
things that happened now never used to happen then. Take, for example, just
one item--the bathroom tap.
Why was the hot tap in the bathroom on a different side this morning? T
hat was a new one.
It is not of the least importance, you understand, but it would be interest
ing to know why.
Do you think she could have changed it over, taken a spanner and a pipe
-wrench and sneaked in during the night and changed it over?
Do you? Well--if you really want to know--yes. The way she'd been acting
lately, she'd be quite capable of doing that.
A strange and difficult woman, that's what she was. Mind you, she used not
to be, but there's no doubt at all that right now she was as strange and diff
icult as they come. Especially at night.
Yes, at night. That was the worst time of all--the night.
Why, when he put out his right hand in bed at night, could his fingers
not feel what they were touching? He had knocked over the lamp and she had
woken up and then sat up suddenly while he was feeling for it on the floor
in the dark.
"What are you doing now?"
"I knocked over the lamp. I'm sorry."
"Oh Christ," she had said. "Yesterday it was the glass of water. What's t
he matter with you?"
Once, the doctor had stroked the back of his hand with a feather, and he h
adn't been able to feel that either. But he had felt it when the man scratched
him with a pin.
"Shut your eyes. No--you mustn't look. Shut them tight. Now tell me if thi
s is hot or cold."
"Hot.",, And this?"
"Cold."
"And this?"
"Cold. I mean hot. Yes, it's hot, isn't it?"
"That's right," the doctor had said. "You did very well."
But that was a year ago.
Why were the switches on the walls, just lately, always a few inches aw

ay from the well-remembered places when he felt for them in the dark?
Don't think about it, he told himself. The only thing is not to think about it
.
And while we're on the subject, why did the walls of the living-room take
on a slightly different shade of colour each day?
Green and blue-green and blue; and sometimes--sometimes slowly swimmin
g like colours seen through the heat-haze of a brazier.
One by one, neatly, like index cards out of a machine, the little questions
dropped.
Whose face appeared for one second at the window during dinner? Whos
e eyes?
"What are you staring at?"
"Nothing," he had answered. "But it would be nice if we could draw the cu
rtains, don't you think?
"Robert, what were you staring at?"
"Nothing,"
"Why were you staring at the window like that?"
"It would be nice if we could draw the curtains, don't you think?" he had
answered.
He was going past the place where he had heard the horse in the field an
d now he could hear it again; the breathing, the soft hoof thuds, and the cr
unch of grass-cropping that was like the noise of a man munching celery.
"Hello old horse," he said, calling loud into the darkness. "Hello old hors
e over there."
Suddenly he heard the footsteps behind him, slow, long-striding footstep
s close behind, and he stopped. The footsteps stopped. He turned around, sea
rching the darkness.
"Good evening," he said, "You here again?"
In the quiet that followed he could hear the wind moving the leaves in th
e hedge.
"Are you going my way?" he said.
Then he turned and walked on, the dog still pulling ahead, and the foots
teps started after him again, but more softly now, as though the person were
walking on toes.
He stopped and turned again.
"I can't see you," he said, "because it's so dark. Are you someone I know?
"
Again the silence, and the cool summer wind on his cheeks, and the dog t
ugging on the leash to get home.
"All right," he called. "You don't have to answer if you don't want to. B
ut remember I know you're there."
Someone trying to be clever.

Far away in the night, over to the west and very high, he heard the faint
hum of an aeroplane. He stopped again, head up, listening.
"Miles away," he said. "Won't come near here." But why, when one of them
flew over the house, did everything inside him come to a stop, and his talk
ing and what he was doing, while he sat or stood in a sort of paralysis wait
ing for the whistle-shriek of the bomb. That one after dinner this evening.
"Why did you duck like that?" she asked, "Duck?"
"Why did you duck? What are you ducking for?"
"Duck?" he had said again. "I don't know what you mean."
"I'll say you don't," she had answered, staring at him hard with those
hard, blue-white eyes, the lids dropping slightly, as always when there was
contempt. The drop of her eyelids was something beautiful to him, the half
-closed eyes and the way the lids dropped and the eyes became hooded when h
er contempt was extreme.
Yesterday, lying in bed in the early morning, when the noise of gunfire
was just beginning far away down the valley, he had reached out with his lef
t hand and touched her body for a little comfort.
"What on earth are you doing?"
"Nothing, dear."
"You woke me up." m sorry."
It would be a help if she would only let him lie closer to her in the earl
y mornings when he began to hear the noise of gunfire.
He would soon be home now. Around the last bend of the lane he could see
a light glowing pink through the curtain of the living-room window, and he
hurried forward to the gate and through it and up the path to the front door
, the dog still pulling ahead.
He stood on the porch, feeling around for the door-knob in the dark.
It was on the right when he went out. He distinctly remembered it being
on the right-hand side when he shut the door half an hour ago and went out.
It couldn't be that she had changed that over too? Just to fox him? Taken
a bag of tools and quickly changed it over to the other side while he was ou
t walking the dog?
He moved his hand over to the left--and the moment the fingers touched
the knob, something small but violent exploded inside his head and with it
a surge of fury and outrage and fear. He opened the door, shut it quickly b
ehind him and shouted "Edna, are you there?"
There was no answer so he shouted again, and this time she heard him.
"What do you want now? You woke me up."
"Come down here a moment, will you. I want to talk to you."
"Oh for heaven's sake," she answered. "Be quiet and come on up."
"Come here!" he shouted. "Come here at once!"
"I'll be damned if I will. You come here."

The man paused, head back, looking up the stairs into the dark of the sec
ond floor. He could see where the stair-rail curved to the left and went on u
p out of sight in the black towards the landing and if you went straight on a
cross the landing you came to the bedroom, and it would be black in there too
.
"Edna!" he shouted. "Edna!"
"Oh go to hell."
He began to move slowly up the stairs, treading quietly, touching the st
air-rail for guidance, up and around the lefthand curve into the dark above.
At the top he took an extra step that wasn't there; but he was ready for it
and there was no noise. He paused awhile then, listening, and he wasn't sur
e, but he thought he could hear the guns starting up again far away down the
valley, heavy stuff mostly, seventy-fives and maybe a couple of mortars som
ewhere in the background.
Across the landing now and through the open doorway--which was easy in
the dark because he knew it so well--through on to the bedroom carpet that
was thick and soft and pale grey although he could not feel or see it.
In the centre of the room he waited, listening for sounds. She had gone b
ack to sleep and was breathing rather loud, making the slightest little whist
le with the air between her teeth each time she exhaled. The curtain flapped
gently against the open window, the alarm-clock tick-tick-ticked beside the b
ed.
Now that his eyes were becoming accustomed to the dark he could just ma
ke out the end of the bed, the white blanket tucked in under the mattress,
the bulge of her feet under the bedclothes; and then, as though aware of th
e presence of the man in the room, the woman stirred. He heard her turn, an
d turn again. The sound of her breathing stopped. There was a succession of
little movement-noises and once the bedsprings creaked, loud as a shout in
the dark.
"Is that you, Robert?"
He made no move, no sound.
"Robert, are you there?"
The voice was strange and rather unpleasant to him.
"Robert!" She was wide awake now. "Where are you?"
Where had he heard that voice before? It had a quality of stridence, dis
sonance, like two single high notes struck together hard in discord. Also th
ere was an inability to pronounce the R of Robert. Who was it that used to s
ay Wobert to him?
"Wobert," she said again. "What are you doing?"
Was it that nurse in the hospital, the tall one with fair hair? No, it was
further back. Such an awful voice as that he ought to remember. Give him a li
ttle time and he would get the name.

At that moment he heard the snap of the switch of the bedside lamp and
in the flood of light he saw the woman half-sitting up in bed, dressed in s
ome sort of a pink nightdress. There was a surprised, wide-eyed expression
on her face. Her cheeks and chin were oily with cold cream.
"You better put that thing down," she was saying, "before you cut yoursel
f."
"Where's Edna?" He was staring at her hard.
The woman, half-sitting up in bed, watched him carefully. He was standing
at the foot of the bed, a huge, broad man, standing motionless, erect, with
heels together, almost at attention, dressed in his dark-brown, woolly, heavy
suit.
"Go on," she ordered. "Put it down."
"Where's Edna?"
"What's the matter with you, Wobert?"
"There's nothing the matter with me. I'm just asking you where's my wife
?"
The woman was easing herself up gradually into an erect sitting position
and sliding her legs towards the edge of the bed. "Well," she said at lengt
h, the voice changing, the hard blue-white eyes secret and cunning, "if you
really want to know, Edna's gone. She left just now while you were out."
"Where did she go?"
"She didn't say."
"And who are you?"
"I'm just a friend of hers."
"You don't have to shout at me," he said. "What's all the excitement?"
"I simply want you to know I'm not Edna."
The man considered this a moment, then he said, "How did you know m
y name?"
"Edna told me." slightly he paused, studying her closely, still Slightly
puzzled, but much calmer now, his eyes calm, perhaps even a little amused the
way they looked at her. "I think I prefer Edna."
In the silence that followed they neither of them moved. The woman was v
ery tense, sitting up straight with her arms tense on either side of her and
slightly bent at the elbows, the hands pressing palms downward on the mattr
ess.
"I love Edna, you know. Did she ever tell you I love her?"
The woman didn't answer.
"I think she's a bitch. But it's a funny thing I love her just the same."
The woman was not looking at the man's face; she was watching his right
hand.
"Awful cruel little bitch, Edna."
And a long silence now, the man standing erect, motionless, the woman s

itting motionless in the bed, and it was so quiet suddenly that through the
open window they could hear the water in the millstream going over the dam
far down the valley on the next farm.
Then the man again, speaking calmly, slowly, quite impersonally: "As a m
atter of fact, I don't think she even likes me any more."
The woman shifted closer to the edge of the bed. "Put that knife down," s
he said, "before you cut yourself."
"Don't shout, please. Can't you talk nicely?" Now, suddenly, the man lean
ed forward, staring intently into the woman's face, and he raised his eyebrow
s. "That's strange," he said. "That's very strange."
He took a step forward, his knees touching the bed. "You look a bit like
Edna yourself."
"Edna's gone out. I told you that."
He continued to stare at her and the woman kept quite still, the palms of
her hands pressing deep into the mattress.
"Well," he said. "I wonder."
"I told you Edna's gone out. I'm a friend of hers. My name is Mary."
"My wife," the man said, "has a funny little brown mole just behind her l
eft ear. You don't have that, do you?"
"I certainly don't."
"Turn your head and let me look."
"I told you I didn't have it."
"Just the same, I'd like to make sure."
The man came slowly around the end of the bed. "Stay where you are," he
said. "Please don't move." And he came towards her slowly, watching her al
l the time, a little smile touching the corners of his mouth.
The woman waited until he was within reach, and then, with a quick righ
t hand, so quick he never saw it coming, she smacked him hard across the fr
ont of the face. And when he sat down on the bed and began to cry, she took
the knife from his hand and went swiftly out of the room, down the stairs
to the hail, where the telephone was.

My Lady Love, My Dove
IT has been my habit for many years to take a nap after lunch. I settle mysel
f in a chair in the living-room with a cushion behind my head and my feet up
on a small square leather stool, and I read until I drop off.
On this Friday afternoon, I was in my chair and feeling as comfortable
as ever with a book in my hands--an old favourite, Doubleday and Westwood
's The Genera of Diurnal Lepidoptera--when my wife, who has never been a s

ilent lady, began to talk to me from the sofa opposite. "These two people,
" she said, "what time are they coming?"
I made no answer, so she repeated the question, louder this time.
I told her politely that I didn't know.
"I don't think I like them very much," she said. "Especially him."
"No dear, all right."
"Arthur. I said I don't think I like them very much."
I lowered my book and looked across at her lying with her feet up on th
e sofa, flipping over the pages of some fashion magazine. "We've only met t
hem once," I said.
"A dreadful man, really. Never stopped telling jokes, or stories, or someth
ing."
"I'm sure you'll manage them very well, dear."
"And she's pretty frightful, too. When do you think they'll arrive?"
Somewhere around six o'clock, I guessed.
"But don't you think they're awful?" she asked, pointing at me with her fi
nger.
"Well.
"They're too awful, they really are."
"We can hardly put them off now, Pamela."
"They're absolutely the end," she said.
"Then why did you ask them?" The question slipped out before I could sto
p myself and I regretted it at once, for it is a rule with me never to provo
ke my wife if I can help it. There was a pause, and I watched her face, wait
ing for the answer--the big white face that to me was something so strange a
nd fascinating there were occasions when I could hardly bring myself to look
away from it. In the evenings sometimes working on her embroidery, or paint
ing those small intricate flower pictures--the face would tighten and glimme
r with a subtle inward strength that was beautiful beyond words, and I would
sit and stare at it minute after minute while pretending to read. Even now,
at this moment, with that compressed acid look, the frowning forehead, the
petulant curl of the nose, I had to admit that there was a majestic quality
about this woman, something splendid, almost stately; and so tall she was, f
ar taller than I--although today, in her fifty-first year, I think one would
have to call her big rather than tall.
"You know very well why I asked them," she answered sharply. "For bridge
, that's all. They play an absolutely first-class game, and for a decent sta
ke." She glanced up and saw me watching her. "Well," she said, "that's about
the way you feel too, isn't it?"
"Well, of course, I.
"Don't be a fool, Arthur."
"The only time I met them I must say they did seem quite nice."

"So is the butcher."
"Now Pamela, dear--please. We don't want any of that."
"Listen," she said, slapping down the magazine on her lap, "you saw the
sort of people they were as well as I did. A pair of stupid climbers who thi
nk they can go anywhere just because they play good bridge."
"I'm sure you're right dear, but what I don't honestly understand is why-"I keep telling you--so that for once we can get a decent game. I'm sick and
tired of playing with rabbits. But I really can't see why I should have these
awful people in the house."
"Of course not, my dear, but isn't it a little late now-- "Arthur?"
"Yes?"
"Why for God's sake do you always argue with me. You know you dislike
d them as much as I did."
"I really don't think you need worry, Pamela. After all, they seemed qui
te a nice well-mannered young couple."
"Arthur, don't be pompous." She was looking at me hard with those wide
grey eyes of hers, and to avoid them--they sometimes made me quite uncomf
ortable I got up and walked over to the french windows that led into the g
arden.
The big sloping lawn out in front of the house was newly mown, striped w
ith pale and dark ribbons of green. On the far side, the two laburnums were
in full flower at last, the long golden chains making a blaze of colour agai
nst the darker trees beyond. The roses were out too, and the scarlet begonia
s, and in the long herbaceous border all my lovely hybrid lupins, columbine,
delphinium, sweet-william, and the huge pale, scented iris. One of the gard
eners was coming up the drive from his lunch. I could see the roof of his co
ttage through the trees, and beyond it to one side, the place where the driv
e went out through the iron gates on the Canterbury road.
My wife's house. Her garden. How beautiful it all was! How peaceful! Now
, if only Pamela would try to be a little less solicitous of my welfare, les
s prone to coax me into doing things for my own good rather than for my own
pleasure, then everything would be heaven. Mind you, I don't want to give th
e impression that I do not love her--I worship the very air she breathes--or
that I can't manage her, or that I am not the captain of my ship. All I am
trying to say is that she can be a trifle irritating at times, the way she c
arries on. For example, those little mannerisms of hers--I do wish she would
drop them all, especially the way she has of pointing a finger at me to emp
hasize a phrase. You must remember that I am a man who is built rather small
, and a gesture like this, when used to excess by a person like my wife, is
apt to intimidate. I sometimes find it difficult to convince myself that she
is not an overbearing woman.
"Arthur!" she called. "Come here."

"What?"
"I've just had a most marvellous idea. Come here."
I turned and went over to where she was lying on the sofa.
"Look," she said, "do you want to have some fun?"
"What sort of fun?"
"With the Snapes?"
"Who are the Snapes?"
"Come on," she said. "Wake up. Henry and Sally Snape. Our weekend gue
sts."
"Well?"
"Now listen. I was lying here thinking how awful they really are... the w
ay they behave him with his jokes and her like a sort of love-crazed sparrow.
.. " She hesitated, smiling slyly, and for some reason, I got the impression
she was about to say a shocking thing. "Well--if that's the way they behave w
hen they're in front of us, then what on earth must they be like when they're
alone together?"
"Now wait a minute, Pamela-- "Don't be an ass, Arthur. Let's have some f
un--some real fun for once--tonight." She had half raised herself up off the
sofa, her face bright with a kind of sudden recklessness, the mouth slightl
y open, and she was looking at me with two round grey eyes, a spark dancing
slowly in each.
"Why shouldn't we?"
"What do you want to do?"
"Why, it's obvious. Can't you see?"
"No I can't."
"All we've got to do is put a microphone in their room." I admit I was e
xpecting something pretty bad, but when she said this I was so shocked I did
n't know what to answer.
"That's exactly what we'll do," she said.
"Here!" I cried. "No. Wait a minute. You can't do that."
"Why not?"
"That's about the nastiest trick I ever heard of. It's like--why, it's like l
istening at keyholes, or reading letters, only far far worse. You don't mean this
seriously, do you?"
"Of course I do."
I knew how much she disliked being contradicted, but there were times whe
n I felt it necessary to assert myself, even at considerable risk. "Pamela,"
I said, snapping the words out, "I forbid you to do it!"
She took her feet down from the sofa and sat up straight. "What in God's
name are you trying to pretend to be, Arthur? I simply don't understand you
."
"That shouldn't be too difficult."

"Tommyrot! I've known you do lots of worse things than this before now.
"
"Never!"
"Oh yes I have. What makes you suddenly think you're a so much nicer p
erson than I am?"
"I've never done things like that."
"All right, my boy," she said, pointing her finger at me like a pistol.
"What about that time at the Milfords' last Christmas? Remember? You nearl
y laughed your head off and I had to put my hand over your mouth to stop th
em hearing us. What about that for one?"
"That was different," I said. "It wasn't our house. And they weren't our gu
ests."
"It doesn't make any difference at all." She was sitting very upright,
staring at me with those round grey eyes, and the chin was beginning to com
e up high in a peculiarly contemptuous manner. "Don't be such a pompous hyp
ocrite," she said. "What on earth's come over you?"
"I really think it's a pretty nasty thing, you know, Pamela. I honestly do."
"But listen, Arthur. I'm a nasty person. And so are you in a secret sort o
f way. That's why we get along together."
"I never heard such nonsense."
"Mind you, if you've suddenly decided to change your character completely
, that's another story."
"You've got to stop talking this way, Pamela."
"You see," she said, "if you really have decided to reform, then what on
earth am I going to do?"
"You don't know what you're saying."
"Arthur, how could a nice person like you want to associate with a stinker
?"
I sat myself down slowly in the chair opposite her, and she was watchin
g me all the time. You understand, she was a big woman, with a big white fa
ce, and when she looked at me hard, as she was doing now, I became--how sha
ll I say it--surrounded, almost enveloped by her, as though she were a grea
t tub of cream and I had fallen in.
"You don't honestly want to do this microphone thing, do you?"
"But of course I do. It's time we had a bit of fun around here. Come on, A
rthur. Don't be so stuffy."
"It's not right, Pamela."
"It's just as right"--up came the finger again--"just as right as when yo
u found those letters of Mary Probert's in her purse and you read them throug
h from beginning to end."
"We should never have done that."
"We!"

"You read them afterwards, Pamela."
"It didn't harm anyone at all. You said so yourself at the time. And this o
ne's no worse."
"How would you like it if someone did it to you?"
"How could I mind if I didn't know it was being done? Come on, Arthur.
Don't be so flabby."
"I'll have to think about it."
"Maybe the great radio engineer doesn't know how to connect the mike to
the speaker?"
"That's the easiest part."
"Well, go on then. Go on and do it."
"I'll think about it and let you know later."
"There's no time for that. They might arrive any moment."
"Then I won't do it. I'm not going to be caught red-handed."
"If they come before you're through. I'll simply keep them down here. N
o danger. What's the time, anyway?"
It was nearly three o'clock.
"They're driving down from London," she said, "and they certainly won't l
eave till after lunch. That gives you plenty of time."
"Which room are you putting them in?"
"The big yellow room at the end of the corridor. That's not too far away, is
it?"
"I suppose it could be done."
"And by the by," she said, "where are you going to have the speaker?"
"I haven't said I'm going to do it yet."
"My God!" she cried, "I'd like to see someone try and stop you now. You
ought to see your face. It's all pink and excited at the very prospect. Put
the speaker in our bedroom why not? But go on and hurry."
I hesitated. It was something I made a point of doing whenever she tried t
o order me about, instead of asking nicely. "I don't like it, Pamela."
She didn't say any more after that; she just sat there, absolutely still,
watching me, a resigned, waiting expression on her face, as though she were
in a long queue. This, I knew from experience, was a danger signal. She was l
ike one of those bomb things with the pin pulled out, and it was only a matte
r of time before--bang! and she would explode. In the silence that followed,
I could almost hear her ticking.
So I got up quietly and went out to the workshop and collected a mike an
d a hundred and fifty feet of wire. Now that I was away from her, I am asham
ed to admit that I began to feel a bit of excitement myself, a tiny warm pri
ckling sensation under the skin, near the tips of my fingers. It was nothing
much, mind you--really nothing at all. Good heavens, I experience the same
thing every morning of my life when I open the paper to check the closing pr

ices on two or three of my wife's larger stockholdings. So I wasn't going to
get carried away by a silly joke like this. At the same time, I couldn't he
lp being amused.
I took the stairs two at a time and entered the yellow room at the end o
f the passage. It had the clean, unlived-in appearance of all guest rooms, w
ith its twin beds, yellow satin bedspreads, pale-yellow walls, and golden-co
loured curtains. I began to look around for a good place to hide the mike. T
his was the most important part of all, for whatever happened, it must not b
e discovered. I thought first of the basket of logs by the fireplace. Put it
under the logs. No--not safe enough. Behind the radiator? On top of the war
drobe? Under the desk? None of these seemed very professional to me. All mig
ht be subject to chance inspection because of a dropped collar stud or somet
hing like that. Finally, with considerable cunning, I decided to Put it insi
de the springing of the sofa. The sofa was against the wall, near the edge o
f the carpet, and my lead wire could go straight under the carpet over to the door.
I tipped up the sofa and slit the material underneath. Then I tied the mi
crophone securely up among the springs, making sure that it faced the room. A
fter that, I led the wire under the carpet to the door. I was calm and cautio
us in everything I did. Where the wire had to emerge from under the carpet an
d pass out of the door, I made a little groove in the wood so that it was alm
ost invisible.
All this, of course, took time, and when I suddenly heard the crunch of
wheels on the gravel of the drive outside, and then the slamming of car door
s and the voices of our guests, I was still only half-way down the corridor
tacking the wire along the skirting. I stopped and straightened up, hammer i
n hand, and I must confess that I felt afraid. You have no idea how unnervin
g that noise was to me. I experienced the same sudden stomachy feeling of fr
ight as when a bomb once dropped the other side of the village during the wa
r, one afternoon, while I was working quietly in the library with my butterf
lies.
Don't worry, I told myself. Pamela will take care of these people. She wo
n't let them come up here.
Rather frantically, I set about finishing the job, and soon I had the wir
e tacked all along the corridor and through into our bedroom. Here, concealme
nt was not so important, although I still did not permit myself to get carele
ss because of the servants. So I laid the wire under the carpet and brought i
t up unobtrusively into the back of the radio. Making the final connections w
as an elementary technical matter and took me no time at all.
Well--I had done it. I stepped back and glanced at the little radio. Some
how, now, it looked different--no longer a silly box for making noises but an
evil little creature that crouched on the table top with a part of its own b
ody reaching out secretly into a forbidden place far away. I switched it on.

It hummed faintly but made no other sound. I took my bedside clock, which had
a loud tick, and carried it along to the yellow room and placed it on the fl
oor by the sofa. When I returned, sure enough the radio creature was ticking
away as loudly as if the clock were in the room--even louder.
I fetched back the clock. Then I tidied myself up in the bathroom, retur
ned my tools to the workshop, and prepared to meet the guests. But first, to
compose myself, and so that I would not have to appear in front of them wit
h the blood, as it were, still wet on my hands, I spent five minutes in the
library with my collection. I concentrated on a tray of the lovely Vanessa c
ardui--the 'painted lady'--and made a few notes for a paper I was preparing
entitled The Relation between Colour Pattern and Framework of Wings', which
I intended to read at the next meeting of our society in Canterbury. In this
way I soon regained my normal grave, attentive manner.
When I entered the living-room, our two guests, whose names I could n
ever remember, were seated on the sofa. My wife was mixing drinks.
"Oh, there you are, Arthur," she said. "Where have you been?"
I thought this was an unnecessary remark. "I'm so sorry," I said to the g
uests as we shook hands. "I was busy and forgot the time."
"We all know what you've been doing," the girl said, smiling wisely. "But
we'll forgive him, won't we, dearest?"
"I think we should," the husband answered.
I had a frightful, fantastic vision of my wife telling them, amidst roars
of laughter, precisely what I had been doing upstairs. She couldn't--she cou
ldn't have done that! I looked round at her and she too was smiling as she me
asured out the gin.
"I'm sorry we disturbed you," the girl said.
I decided that if this was going to be a joke then I'd better join in quickly
, so I forced myself to smile with her.
"You must let us see it," the girl continued.
"See what?"
"Your collection. Your wife says that they are absolutely beautiful."
I lowered myself slowly into a chair and relaxed. It was ridiculous to be
so nervous and jumpy. "Are you interested in butterflies?" I asked her.
"I'd love to see yours, Mr Beauchamp."
The Martinis were distributed and we settled down to a couple of hours
of talk and drink before dinner. It was from then on that I began to form t
he impression that our guests were a charming couple. My wife, coming from
a titled family, is apt to be conscious of her class and breeding, and is o
ften hasty in her judgement of strangers who are friendly towards her--part
icularly tall men. She is frequently right, but in this case I felt that sh
e might be making a mistake. As a rule, I myself do not like tall men eithe
r; they are apt to be supercilious and omniscient. But Henry Snape--my wife

had whispered his name--struck me as being an amiable simple young man wit
h good manners whose main preoccupation, very properly, was Mrs Snape. He w
as handsome in a long-faced, horsy sort of way, with dark-brown eyes that s
eemed to be gentle and sympathetic. I envied him his fine mop of black hair
, and caught myself wondering what lotion he used to keep it looking so hea
lthy. He did tell us one or two jokes, but they were on a high level and no
one could have objected.
"At school," he said, "they used to call me S cervix. Do you know why?"
"I haven't the least idea," my wife answered.
"Because cervix is Latin for nape."
This was rather deep and it took me a while to work out.
"What school was that, Mr Snape?" my wife asked.
"Eton," he said, and my wife gave a quick little nod of approval. Now she
will talk to him, I thought, so I turned my attention to the other One, Sall
y Snape. She was an attractive girl with a bosom. Had I met her fifteen years
earlier I might well have got myself into some sort of trouble. As it was, I
had a pleasant enough time telling her all about my beautiful butterflies. I
was observing her closely as I talked, and after a while I began to get the
impression that she was not, in fact, quite so merry and smiling a girl as I
had been led to believe at first. She seemed to be coiled in herself, as thou
gh with a secret she was jealously guarding. The deep-blue eyes moved too qui
ckly about the room, never settling or resting on one thing for more than a m
oment; and over all her face, though so faint that they might not even have b
een there, those small downward lines of sorrow.
"I'm so looking forward to our game of bridge," I said, finally changing th
e subject.
"Us too," she answered. "You know we play almost every night, we love i
t so."
"You are extremely expert, both of you How did you get to be so good?"
"It's practice," she said. "That's all. Practice, practice, practice."
"Have you played in any championships?"
"Not yet, but Henry wants very much for us to do that. It's hard work, yo
u know, to reach that standard. Terribly hard work." Was there not here, I wo
ndered, a hint of resignation in her voice? Yes, that was probably it; he was
pushing her too hard, making her take it too seriously, and the poor girl wa
s tired of it all.
At eight o'clock, without changing, we moved in to dinner. The meal wen
t well, with Henry Snape telling us some very droll stories. He also praise
d my Richebourg '34 in a most knowledgeable fashion, which pleased me great
ly. By the time coffee came, I realized that I had grown to like these two
youngsters immensely, and as a result I began to feel uncomfortable about t
his microphone business. It would have been all right if they had been horr

id people, but to play this trick on two such charming young persons as the
se filled me with a strong sense of guilt. Don't misunderstand me. I was no
t getting cold feet. It didn't seem necessary to stop the operation. But I
refused to relish the prospect openly as my wife seemed now to be doing, wi
th covert smiles and winks and secret little noddings of the head.
Around nine-thirty, feeling comfortable and well fed, we returned to the
large living-room to start our bridge. We were playing for a fair stake--te
n shillings a hundred--so we decided not to split families, and I partnered
my wife the whole time. We all four of us took the game seriously, which is
the only way to take it, and we played silently, intently, hardly speaking a
t all except to bid. It was not the money we played for. Heaven knows, my wi
fe had enough of that, and so apparently did the Snapes. But among experts i
t is almost traditional that they play for a reasonable stake.
That night the cards were evenly divided, but for once my wife played ba
dly, so we got the worst of it. I could see that she wasn't concentrating fu
lly, and as we came along towards midnight she began not even to care. She k
ept glancing up at me with those large grey eyes of hers, the eyebrows raise
d, the nostrils curiously open, a little gloating smile around the corner of
her mouth.
Our opponents played a fine game. Their bidding was masterly, and all t
hrough the evening they made only one mistake. That was when the girl badly
overestimated her partner's hand and bid six spades. I doubled and they we
nt three down, vulnerable, which cost them eight hundred points. It was jus
t a momentary lapse, but I remember that Sally Snape was very put out by it
, even though her husband forgave her at once, kissing her hand across the
table and telling her not to worry.
Around twelve-thirty my wife announced that she wanted to go to bed.
"Just one more rubber?" Henry Snape said.
"No, Mr Snape. I'm tired tonight. Arthur's tired, too. I can see it. Let's all
go to bed."
She herded us out of the room and we went upstairs, the four of us toget
her. On the way up, there was the usual talk about breakfast and what they w
anted and how they were to call the maid. "I think you'll like your room," m
y wife said. "It has a view right across the valley, and the sun comes to yo
u in the morning around ten o'clock."
We were in the passage now, standing outside our own bedroom door, and
I could see the wire I had put down that afternoon and how it ran along the
top of the skirting down to their room. Although it was nearly the same co
lour as the paint, it looked very conspicuous to me. "Sleep well," my wife
said. "Sleep well, Mrs Snape. Good night, Mr Snape." I followed her into ou
r room and shut the door.
"Quick!" she cried. "Turn it on!" My wife was always like that, frighten

ed that she was going to miss something. She had a reputation, when she went
hunting--I never go myself--of always being right up with the hounds whatev
er the cost to herself or her horse for fear that she might miss a kill. I c
ould see she had no intention of missing this one.
The little radio warmed up just in time to catch the noise of their door op
ening and closing again.
"There!" my wife said. "They've gone in." She was standing in the centre
of the room in her blue dress, her hands clasped before her, her head crane
d forward, intently listening, and the whole of the big white face seemed so
mehow to have gathered itself together, tight like a wine-skin.
Almost at once the voice of Henry Snape came out of the radio, strong a
nd clear. "You're just a goddam little fool," he was saying, and this voice
was so different from the one I remembered, so harsh and unpleasant, it ma
de me jump. "The whole bloody evening wasted! Eight hundred points--that's
eight pounds between us!"
"I got mixed up," the girl answered. "I won't do it again, I promise."
"What's this?" my wife said. "What's going on?" Her mouth was wide open
now, the eyebrows stretched up high, and she came quickly over to the radio
and leaned forward, ear to the speaker. I must say I felt rather excited ITl
yself. "I promise, I promise I won't do it again," the girl was saying.
"We're not taking any chances," the man answered grimly. "We're going t
o have another practice right now."
"Oh no, please! I couldn't stand it!"
"Look," the man said, "all the way out here to take money off this rich b
itch and you have to go and mess it up."
My wife's turn to jump.
"The second time this week," he went on.
"I promise I won't do it again."
"Sit down. I'll sing them out and you answer."
"No, Henry, please! Not all five hundred of them. It'll take three hours."
"All right, then. We'll leave out the finger positions. I think you're sure
of those. We'll just do the basic bids showing honour tricks."
"Oh, Henry, must we? I'm so tired."
"It's absolutely essential that you get them perfect," he said. "We have
a game every day next week, you know that. And we've got to eat."
"What is this?" my wife whispered. "What on earth is it?"
"Shhh!" I said. "Listen!"
"All right," the man's voice was saying. "Now we'll start from the begin
ning. Ready?"
"Oh Henry, please!" She sounded very near to tears.
"Come on, Sally. Pull yourself together."
Then, in a quite different voice, the one we had been used to hearing in

the living-room, Henry Snape said, "One club." I noticed that there was a cur
ious lilting emphasis on the word 'one', the first part of the word drawn out
long.
"Ace queen of clubs," the girl replied wearily. "King jack of spades. No
hearts, and ace jack of diamonds."
"And how many cards to each suit? Watch my finger positions carefully."
"You said we could miss those."
"Well--if you're quite sure you know them?"
"Yes, I know them."
A pause, then "A club."
"King jack of clubs," the girl recited. "Ace of spades. Queen jack of hea
rts, and ace queen of diamonds."
Another pause, then "I'll say one club."
"Ace king of clubs..
"My heavens alive!" I cried. "It's a bidding code! They show every card i
n the hand!"
"Arthur, it couldn't be!"
"It's like those men who go into the audience and borrow something from y
ou and there's a girl blindfold on the stage, and from the way he phrases the
question she can tell him exactly what it is--even a railway ticket, and wha
t station it's from."
"It's impossible!"
"Not at all. But it's tremendous hard work to learn. Listen to them."
"I'll go one heart," the man's voice was saying.
"King queen ten of hearts. Ace jack of spades. No diamonds. Queen jack o
f clubsÉÓ "And you see," I said, "he tells her the number of cards he has in
each suit by the position of his fingers."
"How?"
"I don't know. You heard him saying about it.,, "My God, Arthur! Are you
sure that's what they're doing?"
"I'm afraid so." I watched her as she walked quickly over to the side of
the bed to fetch a cigarette. She lit it with her back to me and then swung
round, blowing the smoke up at the ceiling in a thin stream. I knew we were
going to have to do something about this, but I wasn't quite sure what beca
use we couldn't possibly accuse them without revealing the source of our inf
ormation. I waited for my wife's decision.
"Why, Arthur," she said slowly, blowing out clouds of smoke. "Why, this
is a marvellous idea. D'you think we could learn to do it?"
"What!"
"Of course. Why not?"
"Here! No! Wait a minute, Pamela... " but she came swiftly across the ro

om, right up close to me where I was standing, and she dropped her head and
looked down at me--the old look of a smile that wasn't a smile, at the corne
rs of the mouth, and the curl of the nose, and the big full grey eyes starin
g at me with their bright black centres, and then they were grey, and all th
e rest was white flecked with hundreds of tiny red veins--and when she looke
d at me like this, hard and close, I swear to you it made me feel as though
I were drowning. "Yes," she said. "Why not?"
"But Pamela... Good heavens... No... After all...
"Arthur, I do wish you wouldn't argue with me all the time. That's exactly
what we'll do. Now, go fetch a deck of cards; we'll start right away."

Dip in the Pool
ON the morning of the third day, the sea calmed. Even the most delicate pas
sengers--those who had not been seen around the ship since sailing time--em
erged from their cabins and crept on to the sun deck where the deck steward
gave them chairs and tucked rugs around their legs and left them lying in
rows, their faces upturned to the pale, almost heatless January sun.
It had been moderately rough the first two days, and this sudden calm a
nd the sense of comfort that it brought created a more genial atmosphere ov
er the whole ship. By the time evening came, the passengers, with twelve ho
urs of good weather behind them, were beginning to feel confident, and at e
ight o'clock that night the main dining-room was filled with people eating
and drinking with the assured, complacent air of seasoned sailors.
The meal was not half over when the passengers became aware, by the slig
ht friction between their bodies and the seats of their chairs, that the big
ship had actually started rolling again. It was very gentle at first, just
a slow, lazy leaning to one side, then to the other, but it was enough to ca
use a subtle, immediate change of mood over the whole room. A few of the pas
sengers glanced up from their food, hesitating, waiting, almost listening fo
r the next roll, smiling nerviously, little secret glimmers of apprehension
in their eyes. Some were completely unrufled, somewre openly smug, a number
of the smug ones making jokes about food and weather in order to torture the
few who were beginning to suffer. The movement of the ship then became rapi
dly more and more violent, and only five or six minutes after the first roll
had been noticed, she was swinging heavily from side to side, the passenger
s bracing themselves in their chairs, leaning against the pull as in a car c
ornering.
At last the really bad roll came, and Mr William Botibol, sitting at the
purserÕs table, saw his plate of poached turbot with hollandaise sauce slid

ing suddenly away from under his fork. There was a flutter of excitement, ev
erybody reaching for plates and wineglasses. Mrs Renshaw, seated at the purs
erÕs right, gave a little scream and clutched that gentlemanÕs arm.
ÒGoing to be a dirty night,Ó the purser said, looking at Mrs Renshaw. ÒI
think itÕs blowing up for a very dirty night.Ó There was just the faintest su
ggestion of relish in the way the purser said this.
A steward came hurrying up and sprinkled water on the table cloth betw
een the plates. The excitement subsided. Most of the passengers continued
with their meal. A small number, incluing Mrs Renshaw, got carefully to th
eir fee and threaded their ways with a kind of concealed haste between the
tables and through the doorway.
"Well," the purser said, "there she goes." He glanced around with approva
l at the remainder of his flock who were sitting quiet, looking complacent, t
heir faces reflecting openly that extraordinary pride that travellers seem to
take in being recognized as 'good sailors'.
When the eating was finished and the coffee had been served, Mr Botibol
, who had been unusually grave and thoughtful since the rolling started, su
ddenly stood up and carried his cup of coffee around to Mrs Renshaw's vacan
t place, next to the purser. He seated himself in the chair, then immediate
ly leaned over and began to whisper urgently in the purser's ear. "Excuse m
e," he said, "but could you tell me something, please?"
The purser, small and fat and red, bent forward to listen. "What's the tro
uble, Mr Botibol?"
"What I want to know is this." The man's face was anxious and the purser
was watching it. "What I want to know is will the captain already have made
his estimate on the day's run--you know, for the auction pool? I mean befor
e it began to get rough like this?"
The purser, who had prepared himself to receive a personal confidence, s
miled and leaned back in his seat to relax his full belly. "I should say so-yes," he answered. He didn't bother to whisper his reply, although automati
cally he lowered his voice, as one does when answering a whisperer.
"About how long ago do you think he did it?"
"Some time this afternoon. He usually does it in the afternoon."
"About what time?"
"Oh, I don't know. Around four o'clock I should guess."
"Now tell me another thing. How does the captain decide which number it
shall be? Does he take a lot of trouble over that?"
The purser looked at the anxious frowning face of Mr Botibol and he smil
ed, knowing quite well what the man was driving at. "Well, you see, the capt
ain has a little conference with the navigating officer, and they study the
weather and a lot of other things, and then they make their estimate."
Mr Botibol nodded, pondering this answer for a moment. Then he said,

"Do you think the captain knew there was bad weather coming today?"
"I couldn't tell you," the purser replied. He was looking into the small b
lack eyes of the other man, seeing the two single little specks of excitement
dancing in their centres. "I really couldn't tell you, Mr Botibol. I wouldn't
know."
"If this gets any worse it might be worth buying some of the low numb
ers. What do you think?" The whispering was more urgent, more anxious now
.
"Perhaps it will," the purser said. "I doubt whether the old man allowed
for a really rough night. It was pretty calm this afternoon when he made his
estimate."
The others at the table had become silent and were trying to hear, watchi
ng the purser with that intent, half-cocked, listening look that you can see
also at the race track when they are trying to overhear a trainer talking abo
ut his chance: the slightly open lips, the upstretched eyebrows, the head for
ward and cocked a little to one side--that desperately straining, halfhypnoti
zed, listening look that comes to all of them when they are hearing something
straight from the horse's mouth.
"Now suppose you were allowed to buy a number, which one would you
choose today?" Mr Botibol whispered.
"I don't know what the range is yet," the purser patiently answered. "The
y don't announce the range till the auction starts after dinner. And I'm real
ly not very good at it anyway. I'm only the purser, you know."
At that point Mr Botibol stood up. "Excuse me, all," he said, and he walk
ed carefully away over the swaying floor between the other tables, and twice
he had to catch hold of the back of a chair to steady himself against the shi
p's roll.
"The sun deck, please," he said to the elevator man.
The wind caught him full in the face as he stepped out on to the open d
eck. He staggered and grabbed hold of the rail and held on tight with both
hands, and he stood there looking out over the darkening sea where the grea
t waves were welling up high and white horses were riding against the wind
with plumes of spray behind them as they went.
"Pretty bad out there, wasn't it, sir?" the elevator man said on the way do
wn.
Mr Botibol was combing his hair back into place with a small red comb.
"Do you think we've slackened speed at all on account of the weather?" he a
sked.
"Oh, my word yes, sir. We slackened off considerable since this started. Y
ou got to slacken off speed in weather like this or you'll be throwing the pas
sengers all over the ship."
Down in the smoking-room people were already gathering for the auction.

They were grouping themselves politely around the various tables, the men a
little stiff in their dinner jackets, a little pink and overshaved and stiff
beside their cool white-armed women. Mr Botibol took a chair close to the a
uctioneer's table. He crossed his legs, folded his arms, and settled himself
in his seat with the rather desperate air of a man who has made a tremendou
s decision and refuses to be frightened.
The pool, he was telling himself, would probably be around seven thousa
nd dollars. That was almost exactly what it had been the last two days with
the numbers selling for between three and four hundred apiece. Being a Bri
tish ship they did it in pounds, but he liked to do his thinking in his own
currency. Seven thousand dollars was plenty of money. My goodness, yes! An
d what he would do, he would get them to pay him in hundred-dollar bills an
d he would take it ashore in the inside pocket of his jacket. No problem th
ere. And right away, yes right away, he would buy a Lincoln convertible. He
would pick it up on the way from the ship and drive it home just for the p
leasure of seeing Ethel's face when she came out the front door and looked
at it. Wouldn't that be something, to see Ethel's face when he glided up to
the door in a brand-new pale-green Lincoln convertible! Hello, Ethel, hone
y, he would say, speaking very casual. I just thought I'd get you a little
present. I saw it in the window as I went by, so I thought of you and how y
ou were always wanting one. You like it, honey? he would say. You like the
colour? And then he would watch her face.
The auctioneer was standing up behind his table now. "Ladies and gentlem
en!" he shouted. "The captain has estimated the day's run ending midday tomo
rrow, at five hundred and fifteen miles. As usual we will take the ten numbe
rs on either side of it to make up the range. That makes it five hundred and
five to five hundred and twenty-five. And of course for those who think the
true figure will be still farther away, there'll be 'low field' and 'high f
ield' sold separately as well. Now, we'll draw the first numbers out of the
hat... here we are... five hundred and twelve?"
The room became quiet. The people sat still in their chairs, all eyes w
atching the auctioneer. There was a certain tension in the air, and as the
bids got higher, the tension grew. This wasn't a game or a joke; you could
be sure of that by the way one man would look across at another who had rai
sed his bid--smiling perhaps, but only the lips smiling, the eyes bright an
d absolutely cold. Number five hundred and twelve was knocked down for one
hundred and ten pounds. The next three or four numbers fetched roughly the
same amount.
The ship was rolling heavily, and each time she went over, the wooden pan
elling on the walls creaked as if it were going to split. The passengers held
on to the arms of their chairs, concentrating upon the auction.
"Low field!" the auctioneer called out. "The next number is low field."

Mr Botibol sat up very straight and tense. He would wait, he had decided
, until the others had finished bidding, then he would jump in and make the
last bid. He had figured that there must be at least five hundred dollars in
his account at the bank at home, probably nearer six. That was about two hu
ndred pounds--over two hundred. This ticket wouldn't fetch more than that.
"As you all know," the auctioneer was saying, "low field covers every n
umber below the smallest number in the range, in this case every number bel
ow five hundred and five. So, if you think this ship is going to cover less
than five hundred and five miles in the twenty-four hours ending at noon t
omorrow, you better get in and buy this number. So what am I bid?"
It went clear up to one hundred and thirty pounds. Others beside Mr Boti
bol seemed to have noticed that the weather was rough. One hundred and forty
... fifty... There it stopped. The auctioneer raised his hammer. "Going at o
ne hundred and fifty.
"Sixty!" Mr Botibol called, and every face in the room turned and looked
at him.
"Seventy!"
"Eighty!" Mr Botibol called.
"Ninety!"
"Two hundred!" Mr Botibol called. He wasn't stopping now--not for anyo
ne.
There was a pause.
"Any advance on two hundred pounds?"
Sit still, he told himself. Sit absolutely still and don't look up. It's un
lucky to look up. Hold your breath. No one's going to bid you up so long as you
hold your breath.
"Going for two hundred pounds... " The auctioneer had a pink bald head a
nd there were little beads of sweat sparkling on top of it. "Going... " Mr B
otibol held his breath. "Going... Gone!" The man banged the hammer on the ta
ble. Mr Botibol wrote out a cheque and handed it to the auctioneer's assista
nt, then he settled back in his chair to wait for the finish. He did not wan
t to go to bed before he knew how much there was in the pool.
They added it up after the last number had been sold and it came to twe
nty-one hundredodd pounds. That was around six thousand dollars. Ninety per
cent to go to the winner, ten per cent to seamen's charities. Ninety per c
ent of six thousand was five thousand four hundred. Well---that was enough.
He could buy the Lincoln convertible and there would be something left ove
r, too. With this gratifying thought he went off, happy and excited, to his
cabin.
When Mr Botibol awoke the next morning he lay quite still for several mi
nutes with his eyes shut, listening for the sound of the gale, waiting for t
he roll of the ship. There was no sound of any gale and the ship was not rol

ling. He jumped up and peered out of the porthole. The sea Oh Jesus God---wa
s smooth as glass, the great ship was moving through it fast, obviously maki
ng up for time lost during the night. Mr Botibol turned away and sat slowly
down on the edge of his bunk. A fine electricity of fear was beginning to pr
ickle under the skin of his stomach. He hadn't a hope now. One of the higher
numbers was certain to win it after this.
"Oh, my God," he said aloud. "What shall I do?"
What, for example, would Ethel say? It was simply not possible to tell
her he had spent almost all of their two years' savings on a ticket in the
ships pool. Nor was it possible to keep the matter secret. To do that he wo
uld have to tell her to stop drawing cheques. And what about the monthly in
stalments on the television set and the Encyclopaedia Britannica? Already h
e could see the anger and contempt in the woman's eyes, the blue becoming g
rey and the eyes themselves narrowing as they always did when there was ang
er in them.
"Oh, my God. What shall I do?"
There was no point in pretending that he had the slightest chance now-not unless the goddam ship started to go backwards. They'd have to put her
in reverse and go full speed astern and keep right on going if he was to ha
ve any chance of winning it now. Well, maybe he should ask the captain to d
o just that. Offer him ten per cent of the profits. Offer him more if he wa
nted it. Mr Botibol started to giggle. Then very suddenly he stopped, his e
yes and mouth both opening wide in a kind of shocked surprise. For it was a
t this moment that the idea came. It hit him hard and quick, and he jumped
up from the bed, terribly excited, ran over to the porthole and looked out
again. Well, he thought, why not? Why ever not? The sea was calm and he wou
ldn't have any trouble keeping afloat until they picked him up. He had a va
gue feeling that someone had done this thing before, but that didn't preven
t him from doing it again. The ship would have to stop and lower a boat, an
d the boat would have to go back maybe half a mile to get him, and then it
would have to return to the ship, the whole thing. An hour was about thirty
miles. It would knock thirty miles off the day's run. That would do it. 'L
ow field' would be sure to win it then. Just so long as he made certain som
eone saw him falling over; but that would be simple to arrange. And he'd be
tter wear light clothes, something easy to swim in. Sports clothes, that wa
s it. He would dress as though he were going up to play some deck tennis ju
st a shirt and a pair of shorts and tennis-shoes. And leave his watch behin
d. What was the time? Nine-fifteen. The sooner the better, then. Do it now
and get it over with. Have to do it soon, because the time limit was midday.
Mr Botibol was both frightened and excited when he stepped out on to th
e sun deck in his sports clothes. His small body was wide at the hips, tape
ring upward to extremely narrow sloping shoulders, so that it resembled, in

shape at any rate, a bollard. His white skinny legs were covered with blac
k hairs, and he came cautiously out on deck, treading softly in his tennis
shoes. Nervously he looked around him. There was only one other person in s
ight, an elderly woman with very thick ankles and immense buttocks who was
leaning over the rail staring at the sea. She was wearing a coat of Persian
lamb and the collar was turned up so Mr Botibol couldn't see her face.
He stood still, examining her carefully from a distance. Yes, he told
himself, she would probably do. She would probably give the alarm just as
quickly as anyone else. But wait one minute, take your time, William Botib
ol, take your time. Remember what you told yourself a few minutes ago in t
he cabin when you were changing? You remember that?
The thought of leaping off a ship into the ocean a thousand miles from
the nearest land had made Mr Botibol--a cautious man at the best of times-unusually advertent. He was by no means satisfied yet that this woman he sa
w before him was absolutely certain to give the alarm when he made his jump
. In his opinion there were two possible reasons why she might fail him. Fi
rstly, she might be deaf and blind. It was not very probable, but on the ot
her hand it might be so, and why take a chance? All he had to do was check
it by talking to her for a moment beforehand. Secondly--and this will demon
strate how suspicious the mind of a man can become when it is working throu
gh self-preservation and fear--secondly, it had occurred to him that the wo
man might herself be the owner of one of the high numbers in the pool and a
s such would have a sound financial reason for not wishing to stop the ship
. Mr Botibol recalled that people had killed their fellows for far less tha
n six thousand dollars. It was happening every day in the newspapers. So wh
y take a chance on that either? Check on it first. Be sure of your facts. F
ind out about it by a little polite conversation. Then, provided that the w
oman appeared also to be a pleasant, kindly human being, the thing was a ci
nch and he could leap overboard with a light heart.
Mr Botibol advanced casually towards the woman and took up a position be
side her, leaning on the rail. "Hullo," he said pleasantly.
She turned and smiled at him, a surprisingly lovely, almost a beautiful s
mile, although the face itself was very plain. "Hullo," she answered him.
Check, Mr Botibol told himself, on the first question. She is neither blin
d nor deaf. "Tell me," he said, coming straight to the point, "what did you th
ink of the auction last night?"
"Auction?" she said, frowning. "Auction? What auction?"
"You know, that silly old thing they have in the lounge after dinner, sell
ing numbers on the ship's daily run. I just wondered what you thought about it
."
She shook her head, and again she smiled, a sweet and pleasant smile that
had in it perhaps the trace of an apology. "I'm very lazy," she said. "I alway

s go to bed early. I have my dinner in bed. It's so restful to have dinner in
bed."
Mr Botibol smiled back at her and began to edge away. "Got to go and g
et my exercise now," he said. "Never miss my exercise in the morning. It w
as nice seeing you. Very nice seeing you... " He retreated about ten paces
, and the woman let him go without looking around.
Everything was now in order. The sea was calm, he was lightly dressed f
or swimming, there were almost certainly no man-eating sharks in this part
of the Atlantic, and there was this pleasant kindly old woman to give the a
larm. It was a question now only of whether the ship would be delayed long
enough to swing the balance in his favour. Almost certainly it would. In an
y event, he could do a little to help in that direction himself. He could m
ake a few difficulties about getting hauled up into the lifeboat. Swim arou
nd a bit, back away from them surreptitiously as they tried to come up clos
e to fish him out. Every minute, every second gained would help him win. He
began to move forward again to the rail, but now a new fear assailed him.
Would he get caught in the propeller? He had heard about that happening to
persons falling off the sides of big ships. But then, he wasn't going to fa
ll, he was going to jump, and that was a very different thing. Provided he
jumped out far enough he would be sure to clear the propeller.
Mr Botibol advanced slowly to a position at the rail about twenty yards
away from the woman. She wasn't looking at him now. So much the better. He
didn't want her watching him as he jumped off. So long as no one was watch
ing he would be able to say afterwards that he had slipped and fallen by ac
cident. He peered over the side of the ship. It was a long, long drop. Come
to think of it now, he might easily hurt himself badly if he hit the water
flat. Wasn't there someone who once split his stomach open that way, doing
a belly flop from the high dive? He must jump straight and land feet first
. Go in like a knife. Yes, sir. The water seemed cold and deep and grey and
it made him shiver to look at it. But it was now or never. Be a man, Willi
am Botibol, be a man. All right then now... here goes.
He climbed up on to the wide wooden toprail, stood there poised, balanci
ng for three terrifying seconds, then he leaped--he leaped up and out as far
as he could go and at the same time he shouted "Help!"
"Help! Help!" he shouted as he fell. Then he hit the water and went under
.
When the first shout for help sounded, the woman who was leaning on the
rail started up and gave a little jump of surprise. She looked around quickl
y and saw sailing past her through the air this small man dressed in white s
horts and tennis shoes, spreadeagled and shouting as he went. For a moment s
he looked as though she weren't quite sure what she ought to do: throw a lif
ebelt, run away and give the alarm, or simply turn and yell. She drew back a

pace from the rail and swung half around facing up to the bridge, and for t
his brief moment she remained motionless, tense, undecided. Then almost at o
nce she seemed to relax, and she leaned forward far over the rail, staring a
t the water where it was turbulent in the ship's wake. Soon a tiny round bla
ck head appeared in the foam, an arm raised above it, once, twice, vigorousl
y waving, and a small faraway voice was heard calling something that was dif
ficult to understand. The woman leaned still farther over the rail, trying t
o keep the little bobbing black speck in sight, but soon, so very soon, it w
as such a long way away that she couldn't even be sure it was there at all.
After a while another woman came out on deck. This one was bony and ang
ular, and she wore horn-rimmed spectacles. She spotted the first woman and
walked over to her, treading the deck in the deliberate, military fashion o
f all spinsters.
"So there you are," she said.
The woman with the fat ankles turned and looked at her, but said nothing.
"I've been searching for you," the bony one continued. "Searching all over
."
"It's very odd," the woman with the fat ankles said. "A man dived overboa
rd just now, with his clothes on."
"Nonsense!"
"Oh yes. He said he wanted to get some exercise and he dived in and didn'
t even bother to take his clothes off."
"You better come down now," the bony woman said. Her mouth had sudden
ly become firm, her whole face sharp and alert, and she spoke less kindly
than before. "And don't you ever go wandering about on deck alone like t
his again. You know quite well you're meant to wait for me."
"Yes, Maggie," the woman with the fat ankles answered, and again she smi
led, a tender, trusting smile, and she took the hand of the other one and al
lowed herself to be led away across the deck.
"Such a nice man," she said. "He waved to me."

Galloping Foxley
FIVE days a week, for thirty-six years, I have travelled the eight-twelve tra
in to the City. It is never unduly crowded, and it takes me right in to Canno
n Street Station, only an eleven and a half minute walk from the door of my o
ffice in Austin Friars.
I have always liked the process of commuting; every phase of the little jo
urney is a pleasure to me. There is a regularity about it that is agreeable an

d comforting to a person of habit, and in addition, it serves as a sort of sli
pway along which I am gently but firmly launched into the waters of daily busi
ness routine.
Ours is a smallish country station and only nineteen or twenty people gat
her there to catch the eight-twelve. We are a group that rarely changes, and
when occasionally a new face appears on the platform it causes a certain disc
iamatory, protestant ripple, like a new bird in a cage of canaries.
But normally, when I arrive in the morning with my usual four minutes to
spare, there they all are, good, solid, steadfast people, standing in their r
ight places with their right umbrellas and hats and ties and faces and their
newspapers under their arms, as unchanged and unchangeable through the years
as the furniture in my own living-room. I like that.
I like also my corner seat by the window and reading The Times to the no
ise and motion of the train. This part of it lasts thirty-two minutes and it
seems to soothe both my brain and my fretful old body like a good long mass
age. Believe me, there's nothing like routine and regularity for preserving
one's peace of mind. I have now made this morning journey nearly ten thousan
d times in all, and I enjoy it more and more every day. Also (irrelevant, bu
t interesting), I have become a sort of clock. I can tell at once if we are
running two, three, or four minutes late, and I never have to look up to kno
w which station we are stopped at.
The walk at the other end from Cannon Street to my office is neither to
o long nor too short a healthy little perambulation along streets crowded w
ith fellow commuters all proceeding to their places of work on the same ord
erly schedule as myself. It gives me a sense of assurance to be moving amon
g these dependable, dignified people who stick to their jobs and don't go g
adding about all over the world. Their lives like my own, are regulated nic
ely by the minute hand of an accurate watch, and very often our paths cross
at the same times and places on the street each day.
For example, as I turn the corner into St Swithin's Lane, I invariably co
me head on with a genteel middle-aged lady who wears silver pincenez and carr
ies a black brief-case in her hand--a first-rate accountant, I should say, or
possibly an executive in the textile industry. When I cross over Threadneedl
e Street by the traffic lights, nine times out of ten I pass a gentleman who
wears a different garden flower in his buttonhole each day. He dresses in bla
ck trousers and grey spats and is clearly a punctual and meticulous person, p
robably a banker, or perhaps a solicitor like myself; and several times in th
e last twenty-five years, as we have hurried past one another across the stre
et, our eyes have met in a fleeting glance of mutual approval and respect.
At least half the faces I pass on this little walk are now familiar to me
. And good faces they are too, my kind of faces, my kind of people--sound, se
dulous, businesslike folk with none of that restlessness and glittering eye a

bout them that you see in all these so-called clever types who want to tip th
e world upside-down with their Labour Governments and socialized medicines an
d all the rest of it.
So you can see that I am, in every sense of the words, a contented commu
ter. Or would it be more accurate to say that I was a contented commuter? At
the time when I wrote the little autobiographical sketch you have just read
--intending to circulate it among the staff of my office as an exhortation a
nd an example--I was giving a perfectly true account of my feelings. But tha
t was a whole week ago, and since then something rather peculiar has happene
d. As a matter of fact, it started to happen last Tuesday, the very morning
that I Was carrying the rough draft up to Town in 'fly pocket; and this, to
me, was so timely and coincidental that I can only believe t to have been th
e work of God. God had read my little essay and he had said to himself, 'Thi
s man Perkins is becoming over-complacent. It is high time I taught him a le
sson.' I honestly believe that's what happened.
As I say, it was last Tuesday, the Tuesday after Easter, a warm yellow
spring morning, and I was striding on to the platform of our small countr
y station with The Times tucked under my arm and the draft of 'The Content
ed Commuter' in my pocket, when I immediately became aware that something
was wrong. I could actually feel that curious little ripple of protest run
ning along the ranks of my fellow commuters. I stopped and glanced around.
The stranger was standing plumb in the middle of the platform, feet apa
rt and arms folded, looking for all the world as though he owned the whole
place. He was a biggish, thickset man, and even from behind he somehow mana
ged to convey a powerful impression of arrogance and oil. Very definitely,
he was not one of us. He carried a cane instead of an umbrella, his shoes w
ere brown instead of black, the grey hat was cocked at a ridiculous angle,
and in one way and another there seemed to be an excess of silk and polish
about his person. More than this I did not care to observe. I walked straig
ht past him with my face to the sky, adding, I sincerely hope, a touch of r
eal frost to an atmosphere that was already cool.
The train came in. And now, try if you can to imagine my horror when th
e new man actually followed me into my own compartment! Nobody had done thi
s to me for fifteen years. My colleagues always respect my seniority. One o
f my special little pleasures is to have the place to myself for at least o
ne, sometimes two or even three stations. But here, if you please, was this
fellow, this stranger, straddling the seat opposite and blowing his nose a
nd rustling the Daily Mail and lighting a disgusting pipe.
I lowered my Times and stole a glance at his face. I suppose he was abo
ut the same age as me--sixty-two or three--but he had one of those unpleasa
ntly handsome, brown, leathery countenances that you see nowadays in advert
isements for men's shirts--the lion shooter and the polo player and the Eve

rest climber and the tropical explorer and the racing yatchsman all rolled
into one; dark eyebrows, steely eyes, strong white teeth clamping the stem
of a pipe. Personally, I mistrust all handsome men. The superficial pleasur
es of this life come too easily to them, and they seem to walk the world as
though they themselves were personally responsible for their own good look
s. I don't mind a woman being pretty. That's different. But in a man, I'm s
orry, but somehow or other I find it downright offensive. Anyway, here was
this one sitting right opposite me in the carriage, and I was looking at hi
m over the top of my Times when suddenly he glanced up and our eyes met.
"D'you mind the pipe?" he asked, holding t up in his fingers. That was al
l he said. But the sound of his voice had a sudden and extraordinary effect u
pon me. In fact, I think I jumped. Then I sort of froze up and sat staring at
him for at least a minute before I got hold of myself and made an answer.
"This is a smoker," I said, "so you may do as you please."
"I just thought I'd ask."
There it was again, that curiously crisp, familiar voice, clipping its w
ords and spitting them out very hard and small like a little quickfiring gun
shooting out raspberry seeds. Where had I heard it before? and why did ever
y word seem to strike upon some tiny tender spot far back in my memory? Good
heavens, I thought. Pull yourself together. What sort of nonsense is this?
The stranger returned to his paper. I pretended to do the same. But by th
is time I was properly put out and I couldn't concentrate at all. Instead, I
kept stealing glances at him over the top of the editorial page. It was reall
y an intolerable face, vulgarly, almost lasciviously handsome, with an oily s
alacious sheen all over the skin. But had I or had I not seen it before some
time in my life? I began to think I had, because now, even when I looked at t
I felt a peculiar kind of discomfort that I cannot quite describe--something
to do with pain and with violence, perhaps even with fear.
We spoke no more during the journey, but you can well imagine that by t
hen my whole routine had been thoroughly upset. My day was ruined; and more
than one of my clerks at the office felt the sharper edge of my tongue, pa
rticularly after luncheon when my digestion started acting up on me as well
. The next morning, there he was again standing in the middle of the platfo
rm with his cane and his pipe and his silk scarf and his nauseatingly hands
ome face. I walked past him and approached a certain Mr Grummitt, a stockbr
oker who has been commuting with me for over twenty-eight years. I can't sa
y I've ever had an actual conversation with him before--we are rather a res
erved lot on our station--but a crisis like this will usually break the ice.
"Grummitt," I whispered. "Who's this bounder?"
"Search me," Grummitt said.
"Pretty unpleasant."
"Very."

"Not going to be a regular, I trust."
"Oh God," Grummitt said.
Then the train came in.
This time, to my relief, the man got into another compartment.
But the following morning I had him with me again.
"Well," he said, settling back in the seat directly opposite. "It's a toppi
ng day." And once again I felt that slow uneasy stirring of the memory, stronge
r than ever this time, closer to the surface but not yet quite within my reach.
Then came Friday, the last day of the week. I remember it had rained as
I drove to the station, but it was one of those warm sparkling April showers
that last only five or six minutes, and when I walked on to the platform, a
ll the umbrellas were rolled up and the sun was shining and there were big w
hite clouds floating in the sky. In spite of this, I felt depressed. There w
as no pleasure in this journey for me any longer. I knew the stranger would
be there. And sure enough, he was, standing with his legs apart just as thou
gh he owned the place, and this time swinging his cane casually back and for
th through the air.
The cane! That did it! I stopped like I'd been shot.
"It's Foxley!" I cried under my breath. "Galloping Foxley! And still swin
ging his cane!"
I stepped closer to get a better look. I tell you I've never had such a sh
ock in all my life. It was Foxley all right. Bruce Foxley or Galloping Foxley
as we used to call him. And the last time I'd seen him, let me see--it was at
school and I was no more than twelve or thirteen years old.
At that point the train came in, and heaven help me if he didn't get int
o my compartment once again. He put his hat and cane up on the rack, then tu
rned and sat down and began lighting his pipe. He glanced up at me through t
he smoke with those rather small cold eyes and he said, "Ripping day, isn't
it. Just like summer."
There was no mistaking the voice now. It hadn't changed at all. Except tha
t the things I had been used to hearing it say were different.
'All right, Perkins,' it used to say. 'All right, you nasty little boy. I am ab
out to beat you again.'
How long ago was that? It must be nearly fifty years. Extraordinary, tho
ugh, how little the features had altered. Still the same arrogant tilt of th
e chin, the flaring nostrils, the contemptuous staring eyes that were too sm
all and a shade too close together for comfort; still the same habit of thru
sting his face forward at you, impinging on you, pushing you into a corner;
and even the hair I could remember--coarse and slightly wavy, with just a tr
ace of oil all over it, like a well-tossed salad. He used to keep a bottle o
f green hair mixture on the side table in his study--when you have to dust a

room you get to know and to hate all the objects in it--and this bottle had
the royal coat of arms on the label and the name of a shop in Bond Street,
and under that, in small print, it said 'By Appointment--Hairdressers To His
Majesty King Edward VII.' I can remember that particularly because it seeme
d so funny that a shop should want to boast about being hairdresser to someo
ne who was practically bald--even a monarch.
And now I watched Foxley settle back in his seat and begin reading the
paper. It was a curious sensation, sitting only a yard away from this man w
ho fifty years before had made me so miserable that I had once contemplated
suicide. He hadn't recognized me; there wasn't much danger of that because
of my moustache. I felt fairly sure I was safe and could sit there and wat
ch him all I wanted.
Looking back on it, there seems little doubt that I suffered very badly
at the hands of Bruce Foxley my first year in school, and strangely enough
, the unwitting cause of it all was my father. I was twelve and a half when
I first went off to this fine old public school. That was, let me see, in
1907. My father, who wore a silk topper and morning coat, escorted me to th
e station, and I can remember how we were standing on the platform among pi
les of wooden tuck-boxes and trunks and what seemed like thousands of very
large boys milling about and talking and shouting at one another, when sudd
enly somebody who was wanting to get by us gave my father a great push from
behind and nearly knocked him off his feet.
My father, who was a small, courteous, dignified person, turned around wi
th surprising speed and seized the culprit by the wrist.
"Don't they teach you better manners than that at this school, young man?
" he said.
The boy, at least a head taller than my father, looked down at him with a
cold, arrogantlaughing glare, and said nothing.
"It seems to me," my father said, staring back at him, "that an apology wo
uld be in order."
But the boy just kept on looking down his nose at my father with this funn
y little arrogant smile at the corners of his mouth, and his chin kept coming
further and further out.
"You strike me as being an impudent and ill-mannered boy," my father we
nt on. "And I can only pray that you are an exception in your school. I wou
ld not wish for any son of mine to pick up such habits."
At this point, the big boy inclined his head slightly in my direction, an
d a pair of small, cold, rather close together eyes looked down into mine. I
was not particularly frightened at the time; I knew nothing about the power o
f senior boys over junior boys at public schools; and I can remember that I l
ooked straight back at him in support of my father, whom I adored and respect
ed.

When my father started to say something more, the boy simply turned aw
ay and sauntered slowly down the platform into the crowd.
Bruce Foxley never forgot this episode; and of course the really unlucky
thing about it for me was that when I arrived at school I found myself in t
he same 'house' as him. Even worse than that--I was in his study. He was doi
ng his last year, and he was a prefect 'a boazer' we called it and as such h
e was officially permitted to beat any of the fags in the house. But being i
n his study, I automatically became his own particular, personal slave. I wa
s his valet and cook and maid and errand-boy, and it was my duty to see that
he never lifted a finger for himself unless absolutely necessary. In no soc
iety that I know of in the world is a servant imposed upon to the extent tha
t we wretched little fags were imposed upon by the boazers at school. In fro
sty or snowy weather I even had to sit on the seat of the lavatory (which wa
s in an unheated outhouse) every morning after breakfast to warm it before F
oxley came along.
I could remember how he used to saunter across the room in his loose-jo
inted, elegant way, and if a chair were in his path he would knock it aside
and I would have to run over and Pick it up. He wore silk shirts and alway
s had a silk handkerchief tucked up his sleeve, and his shoes were made by
someone called Lobb (who also had a royal crest). They were pointed shoes,
and it was my duty to rub the leather with a bone for fifteen minutes each
day to make it shine.
But the worst memories of all had to do with the changing room.
I could see myself now, a small pale shrimp of a boy standing just insid
e the door of this huge room in my pyjamas and bedroom slippers and brown ca
mel-hair dressing-gown. A single bright electric bulb was hanging on a flex
from the ceiling, and all around the walls the black and yellow football shi
rts with their sweaty smell filling the room, and the voice, the clipped, pi
p-spitting voice was saying, "So which is it to be this time? Six with the d
ressing-gown on--or four with it off?"
I never could bring myself to answer this question. I would simply stand
there staring down at the dirty floor-planks, dizzy with fear and unable to t
hink of anything except that this other larger boy would soon start smashing
away at me with his long, thin, white stick, slowly, scientifically, skilfull
y, legally, and with apparent relish, and I would bleed. Five hours earlier,
I had failed to get the fire to light in his study. I had spent my pocket mon
ey on a box of special firelighters and I had held a newspaper across the chi
mney opening to make a draught and I had. knelt down in front of it and blown
my guts out into the bottom of the grate; but the coals would not burn.
"If you're too obstinate to answer," the voice was saying, "then I'll hav
e to decide for you." I wanted desperately to answer because I knew which one
I had to choose. It's the first thing you learn when you arrive. Always keep

the dressing-gown on and take the extra strokes. Otherwise you're almost cer
tain to get cut. Even three with it on is better than one with it off.
"Take it off then and get into the far corner and touch your toes. I'm goin
g to give you four."
Slowly I would take it off and lay it on the ledge above the boot-locke
rs. And slowly I would walk over to the far corner, cold and naked now in m
y cotton pyjamas, treading softly and seeing everything around me suddenly
very bright and flat and far away, like a magic lantern picture, and very b
ig, and very unreal, and sort of swimming through the water in my eyes.
"Go on and touch your toes. Tighter--much tighter than that."
Then he would walk down to the far end of the changing-room and I woul
d be watching him upside down between my legs, and he would disappear thro
ugh a doorway that led down two steps into what we called 'the basin-passa
ge'. This was a stone-floored corridor with wash basins along one wall, an
d beyond it was the bathroom. When Foxley disappeared I knew he was walkin
g down to the far end of the basin-passage. Foxley always did that. Then,
in the distance, but echoing loud among the basins and the tiles, I would
hear the noise of his shoes on the stone floor as he started galloping for
ward, and through my legs I would see him leaping up the two steps into th
e changing-room and come bounding towards me with his face thrust forward
and the cane held high in the air. This was the moment when I shut my eyes
and waited for the crack and told myself that whatever happened I must no
t straighten up.
Anyone who has been properly beaten will tell you that the real pain doe
s not come until about eight or ten seconds after the stroke. The stroke its
elf is merely a loud crack and a sort of blunt thud against your backside, n
umbing you completely (I'm told a bullet wound does the same). But later on,
oh my heavens, it feels as if someone is laying a red hot poker right acros
s your naked buttocks and it is absolutely impossible to prevent yourself fr
om reaching back and clutching it with your fingers.
Foxley knew all about this time lag, and the slow walk back over a distan
ce that must altogether have been fifteen yards gave each stroke plenty of ti
me to reach the peak of its pain before the next one was delivered.
On the fourth stroke I would invariably straighten up. I couldn't help it.
It was an automatic defence reaction from a body that had had as much as it c
ould stand.
"You flinched," Foxley would say. "That one doesn't count. Go on--down
you get."
The next time I would remember to grip my ankles.
Afterwards he would watch me as I walked over--very stiff now and hol
ding my backside--to put on my dressing-gown, but I would always try to k
eep turned away from him so he couldn't see my face. And when I went out,

it would be, "Hey, you! Come back!"
I was in the passage then, and I would stop and turn and stand in the doo
rway, waiting.
"Come here. Come on, come back here. Now--haven't you forgotten some
thing?"
All I could think of at that moment was the excruciating burning pain in
my behind.
"You strike me as being an impudent and ill-mannered boy," he would say,
imitating my father's voice. "Don't they teach you better manners than that
at this school?"
"Thank... you," I would stammer. "Thank you... for the beating."
And then back up the dark stairs to the dormitory and it became much b
etter then because it was all over and the pain was going and the others w
ere clustering round and treating me with a certain rough sympathy born of
having gone through the same thing themselves, many times.
"Hey, Perkins, let's have a look."
"How many d'you get?"
"Five, wasn't it? We heard them easily from here."
"Come on, man. Let's see the marks."
I would take down my pyjamas and stand there, while this group of exp
erts solemnly examined the damage.
"Rather far apart, aren't they? Not quite up to Foxley's usual standard."
"Two of them are close. Actually touching. Look these two are beauties!"
"That low one was a rotten shot."
"Did he go right down the basin-passage to start his run?"
"You got an extra one for flinching, didn't you?"
"By golly, old Foxley's really got it in for you, Perkins."
"Bleeding a bit too. Better wash it, you know."
Then the door would open and Foxley would be there, and everyone would
scatter and pretend to be doing his teeth or saying his prayers while I was
left standing in the centre of the room with my pants down.
"What's going on here?" Foxley would say, taking a quick look at his o
wn handiwork. "You--Perkins! Put your pyjamas on properly and get to bed."
And that was the end of a day.
Through the week, I never had a moment of time to myself. If Foxley saw
me in the study taking up a novel or perhaps opening my stamp album, he wo
uld immediately find something for me to do. One of his favourites, especia
lly when it was raining outside, was, 'Oh, Perkins, I think a bunch of wild
irises would look rather nice on my desk, don't you?'
Wild irises grew only around Orange Ponds. Orange Ponds was two miles d
own the road and half a mile across the fields. I would get up from my chai

r, put on my raincoat and my straw hat, take my umbrella--my brolly--and se
t off on this long and lonely trek. The straw hat had to be worn at all tim
es outdoors, but it was easily destroyed by rain; therefore the brolly was
necessary to protect the hat. On the other hand, you can't keep a brolly ov
er your head while scrambling about on a woody bank looking for irises, so
to save my hat from ruin I would put it on the ground under my brolly while
I searched for flowers. In this way, I caught many colds.
But the most dreaded day was Sunday. Sunday was for cleaning the study,
and how well I can remember the terrot of those mornings, the frantic dust
ing and scrubbing, and then the waiting for Foxley to come in to inspect.
"Finished?" he would ask.
"I... I think so."
Then he would stroll over to the drawer of his desk and take out a singl
e white glove, fitting it slowly on to his right hand, pushing each finger w
ell home, and I would stand there watching and trembling as he moved around
the room running his white-gloved forefinger along the picture tops, the ski
rting, the shelves, the window sills, the lamp shades. I never took my eyes
off that finger. For me it was an instrument of doom. Nearly always, it mana
ged to discover some tiny crack that I had overlooked or perhaps hadn't even
thought about; and when this happened Foxley would turn slowly around, smil
ing that dangerous little smile that wasn't a smile, holding up the white fi
nger so that I Should see for myself the thin smudge of dust that lay along
the side of it.
"Well," he would say. "So you're a lazy little boy. Aren't you?" No answer
.
"Aren't you?"
"I thought I dusted it all."
"Are you or are you not a nasty, lazy little boy?"
"Y-yes."
"But your father wouldn't want you to grow up like that, would he? Your f
ather is very particular about manners, is he not?"
No answer.
"I asked you, is your father particular about manners?"
"Perhaps--yes."
"Therefore I will be doing him a favour if I punish you, won't I?"
"I don't know."
"Won't I?"
"Y-yes."
"We will meet later then, after prayers, in the changing-room."
The rest of the day would be spent in an agony of waiting for the evening
to come.
Oh my goodness, how it was all coming back to me now. Sunday was also

letter-writing time. 'Dear Mummy and Daddy--thank you very much for your
letter. I hope you are both well. I am, except I have got a cold because
I got caught in the rain but it will soon be over. Yesterday we played S
hrewsbury and beat them 4-2. I watched and Foxley who you know is the hea
d of our house scored one of our goals. Thank you very much for the cake.
With love from William.'
I usually went to the lavatory to write my letter, or to the boot-hole, o
r the bathroom any place out of Foxley's way. But I had to watch the time. Te
a was at four-thirty and Foxley's toast had to be ready. Every day I had to m
ake toast for Foxley, and on weekdays there were no fires allowed in the stud
ies, so all the fags, each making toast for his own studyholder, would have t
o crowd around the one small fire in the library, jockeying for position with
his toastingfork. Under these conditions, I still had to see that Foxley's t
oast was (1) very crisp, (2) not burned at all, (3) hot and ready exactly on
time. To fail in any one of these requirements was a 'beatable offence'.
"Hey, you! 'What's this?"
"It's toast."
"Is this really your idea of toast?"
"Well... "You're too idle to make it right, aren't you?"
"I try to make it."
"You know what they do to an idle horse, Perkins?"
"Are you a horse?"
"Well--anyway, you're an ass--ha, ha so I think you qualify. I'll be seeing
you later."
Oh, the agony of those days. To burn Foxley's toast was a 'beatable off
ence'. So was forgetting to take the mud off Foxley's football boots. So wa
s failing to hang up Foxley's football clothes. So was rolling up Foxley's
brolly the wrong way round. So was banging the study door when Foxley was w
orking. So was filling Foxley's bath too hot for him. So was not cleaning t
he buttons properly on Foxley's OTC uniform. So was making those blue metal
-polish smudges on the uniform itself. So was failing to shine the soles of
Foxley's shoes. So was leaving Foxley's study untidy at any time. In fact,
so far as Foxley was concerned, I was practically a beatable offence myself.
I glanced out of the window. My goodness, we were nearly there. I must h
ave been dreaming away like this for quite a while, and I hadn't even opened
my Times. Foxley was still leaning back in the corner seat opposite me read
ing his Daily Mail, and through a cloud of blue smoke from his pipe I could
see the top half of his face over the newspaper, the small bright eyes, the
corrugated forehead, the wavy, slightly oily hair.
Looking at him now, after all that time, was a peculiar and rather exciti
ng experience. I knew he was no longer dangerous, but the old memories were s
till there and I didn't feel altogether comfortable in his presence. It was s

omething like being inside the cage with a tame tiger.
What nonsense is this? I asked myself. Don't be so stupid. My heavens,
if you wanted to you could go ahead and tell him exactly what you thought o
f him and he couldn't touch you. Hey--that was an idea!
Except that--well--after all, was it worth it? I was too old for that sort
of thing now, and I wasn't sure that I really felt much anger towards him anywa
y.
So what should I do? I couldn't sit there staring at him like an idiot.
At that point, a little impish fancy began to take a hold of me. What I
would like to do, I told myself, would be to lean across and tap him lightly
on the knee and tell him who I was. Then I would watch his face. After that
, I would begin talking about our schooldays together, making it just loud e
nough for the other people in the carriage to hear. I would remind him playf
ully of some of the things he used to do to me, and perhaps even describe th
e changing-room beatings so as to embarrass him a trifle. A bit of teasing a
nd discomfort wouldn't do him any harm. And it would do me an awful lot of g
ood.
Suddenly he glanced up and caught me staring at him. It was the second tim
e this had happened, and I noticed a flicker of irritation in his eyes.
All right, I told myself. Here we go. But keep it pleasant and sociable a
nd polite. It'll be much more effective that way, more embarrassing for him.
So I smiled at him and gave him a courteous little nod. Then, raising my
voice, I said, "I do hope you'll excuse me. I'd like to introduce myself."
I was leaning forward watching him closely so as not to miss the reaction. "
My name is Perkins--William Perkins--and I was at Repton in 1907."
The others in the carriage were sitting very still, and I could sense that
they were all listening and waiting to see what would happen next.
"I'm glad to meet you," he said, lowering the paper to his lap. "Mine's F
ortescue--Jocelyn Fortescue, Eton 1916."

Skin
THAT year--1946--winter was a long time going. Although it was April, a fr
eezing wind blew through the streets of the city, and overhead the snow cl
ouds moved across the sky.
The old man who was called Drioli shuffled painfully along the sidewalk
of the rue de Rivoli. He was cold and miserable, huddled up like a hedgehog
in a filthy black coat, only his eyes and the top of his head visible above
the turned-up collar.
The door of a cafŽ opened and the faint whiff of roasting chicken broug

ht a pain of yearning to the top of his stomach. He moved on glancing witho
ut any interest at the things in the shop windows--perfume, silk ties and s
hirts, diamonds, porcelain, antique furniture, finely bound books. Then a p
icture gallery. He had always liked picture galleries. This one had a singl
e canvas on display in the window. He stopped to look at it. He turned to g
o on. He checked, looked back; and now, suddenly, there came to him a sligh
t uneasiness, a movement of the memory, a distant recollection of something
, somewhere, he had seen before. He looked again. It was a landscape, a clu
mp of trees leaning madly over to one side as if blown by a tremendous wind
, the sky swirling and twisting all around. Attached to the frame there was
a little plaque, and on this it said: CHAIM SOUTINE (1894--1943).
Drioli stared at the picture, wondering vaguely what there was about it t
hat seemed familiar. Crazy painting, he thought. Very strange and crazy--but
I like it... Chaim Soutine Soutine... "By God!" he cried suddenly. "My little
Kalmuck, that's who it is! My little Kalmuck with a picture in the finest sh
op in Paris! Just imagine that!"
The old man pressed his face closer to the window. He could remember the
boy--yes, quite clearly he could remember him. But when? The rest of it was
not so easy to recollect. It was so long ago. How long? Twenty--no, more li
ke thirty years, wasn't it? Wait a minute. Yes--it was the year before the w
ar, the first war, 1913. That was it. And this Soutine, this ugly little Kal
muck, a sullen brooding boy whom he had liked--almost loved--for no reason a
t all that he could think of except that he could paint.
And how he could paint! It was coming back more clearly now--the street,
the line of refuse cans along the length of it, the rotten smell, the brown
cats walking delicately over the refuse, and then the women, moist fat wome
n sitting on the doorsteps with their feet upon the cobblestones of the stre
et. Which Street? Where was it the boy had lived?
The Cite Falgui•re, that was it! The old man nodded his head several tim
es, pleased to have remembered the name. Then there was the studio with the
single chair in it, and the filthy red couch that the boy had used for sleep
ing; the drunken parties, the cheap white wine, the furious quarrels, and al
ways, always the bitter sullen face of the boy brooding over his work.
It was odd, Drioli thought, how easily it all came back to him now, how
each single small remembered fact seemed instantly to remind him of anothe
r.
There was that nonsense with the tattoo, for instance. Now, that was a ma
d thing if ever there was one. How had it started? Ah, yes--he had got rich o
ne day, that was it, and he had bought lots of wine. He could see himself now
as he entered the studio with the parcel of bottles under his arm the boy si
tting before the easel, and his (Drioli's) own wife standing in the centre of
the room, posing for her picture.

"Tonight we shall celebrate," he said. "We shall have a little celebration,
us three."
"What is it that we celebrate?" the boy asked, without looking up. "Is it
that you have decided to divorce your wife so she can marry me?"
"No," Drioli said. "We celebrate because today I have made a great sum
of money with my work."
"And I have made nothing. We can celebrate that also."
"If you like." Drioli was standing by the table unwrapping the parcel. H
e felt tired and he wanted to get at the wine. Nine clients in one day was a
ll very nice, but it could play hell with a man's eyes. He had never done as
many as nine before. Nine boozy soldiers and the remarkable thing was that
no fewer than seven of them had been able to pay in cash. This had made him
extremely rich. But the work was terrible on the eyes. Drioli's eyes were ha
lf closed from fatigue, the whites streaked with little connecting lines of
red; and about an inch behind each eyeball there was a small concentration o
f pain. But it was evening now and he was wealthy as a pig, and in the parce
l there were three bottles--one for his wife, one for his friend, and one fo
r him. He had found the corkscrew and was drawing the corks from the bottles
, each making a small plop as it came out.
The boy put down his brush. "Oh, Christ," he said. "How can one work wi
th all this going on?"
The girl came across the room to look at the painting. Drioli came over als
o, holding a bottle in one hand, a glass in the other.
"No," the boy shouted, blazing up suddenly. "Please--no!" He snatched the
canvas from the easel and stood it against the wall. But Drioli had seen it.
"I like it."
"It's terrible."
"It's marvellous. Like all the others that you do, it's marvellous. I love the
m all."
"The trouble is," the boy said, scowling, "that in themselves they are not
nourishing. I cannot eat them."
"But still they are marvellous." Drioli handed him a tumblerful of the pa
le-yellow wine. "Drink it," he said. "It will make you happy."
Never, he thought, had he known a more unhappy person, or one with a gl
oomier face. He had spotted him in a cafŽ some seven months before, drinkin
g alone, and because he had looked like a Russian or some sort of an Asiati
c, Drioli had sat down at his table and talked.
"You are a Russian?"
"Yes."
"Where from?"
"Minsk."

Drioli had jumped up and embraced him, crying that he too had been born
in that city.
"It wasn't actually Minsk," the boy had said. "But quite near."
"Where?"
"Smilovichi, about twelve miles away."
"Smilovichi!" Drioli had shouted, embracing him again. "I walked there
several times when I was a boy." Then he had sat down again, staring affect
ionately at the other's face. "You know," he had said, "you don't look like
a western Russian. You're like a Tartar, or a Kalmuck. You look exactly li
ke a Kalmuck."
Now, standing in the studio, Drioli looked again at the boy as he took t
he glass of wine and tipped it down his throat in one swallow. Yes, he did h
ave a face like a Kalmuck--very broad and high-cheeked, with a wide coarse n
ose. This broadness of the cheeks was accentuated by the ears which stood ou
t sharply from the head. And then he had the narrow eyes, the black hair, th
e thick sullen mouth of a Kalmuck, but the hands the hands were always a sur
prise, so small and white like a lady's, with tiny thin fingers. "Give me so
me more)" the boy said. "If we are to celebrate then let us do it properly."
Drioli distributed the wine and sat himself on a chair. The boy sat on th
e old couch with Drioli's wife. The three bottles were placed on the floor be
tween them.
"Tonight we shall drink as much as we possibly can," Drioli said. "I am
exceptionally rich. I think perhaps I should go out now and buy some more
bottles. How many shall I get?"
"Six more," the boy said. "Two for each."
"Good. I shall go now and fetch them."
"And I will help you."
In the nearest cafŽ Drioli bought six bottles of white wine, and then car
ried them back to the studio. They placed them on the floor in two rows, and
Drioli fetched the corkscrew and pulled the corks, all six of them; then they
sat down again and continued to drink.
"It is only the very wealthy," Drioli said, "who can afford to celebrate in
this manner."
"That is true," the boy said. "Isn't that true, Josie?"
"Of course."
"How do you feel, Josie?"
"Fine."
"Will you leave Drioli and marry me?",, "Beautiful wine," Drioli said. "It i
s a privilege to drink it."
Slowly, methodically, they set about getting themselves drunk. The proce
ss was routine, but all the same there was a certain ceremony to be observed
, and a gravity to be maintained, and a great number of things to be said, t

hen said again--and the wine must be praised, and the slowness was important
too, so that there would be time to savour the three delicious stages of tr
ansition, especially (for Drioli) the one when he began to float and his fee
t did not really belong to him. That was the best period of them all--when h
e could look down at his feet and they were so far away that he would wonder
what crazy person they might belong to and why they were lying around on th
e floor like that, in the distance.
After a while, he got up to switch on the light. He was surprised to see
that the feet came with him when he did this, especially because he couldn'
t feel them touching the ground. It gave him a pleasant sensation of walking
on air. Then he began wandering around the room, peeking slyly at the canva
ses stacked against the walls.
"Listen," he said at length. "I have an idea." He came across and stood b
efore the couch, swaying gently. "Listen, my little Kalmuck."
"What?"
"I have a tremendous idea. Are you listening?"
"I'm listening to Josie."
"Listen to me, please. You are my friend my ugly little Kalmuck from Min
sk and to me you are such an artist that I would like to have a picture, a l
ovely picture-- "Have them all. Take all you can find, but do not interrupt
me when I am talking with your wife."
"No, no. Now listen. I mean a picture that I can have with me always...
for ever wherever I go... whatever happens... but always with me... a pictur
e by you." He reached forward and shook the boy's knee. "Now listen to me, p
lease."
"Listen to him," the girl said.
"It is this. I want you to paint a picture on my skin, on my back. Then I
want you to tattoo over what you have painted so that it will be there always.
"
"You have crazy ideas."
"I will teach you how to use the tattoo. It is easy. A child could do it."
"I am not a child."
"Please... "You are quite mad. What is it you want?" The painter looked
up into the slow, dark, wine-bright eyes of the other man. "What in heaven's
name is it you want?"
"You could do it easily! You could! You could!"
"You mean with the tattoo?"
"Yes, with the tattoo! I will teach you in two minutes!"
"Impossible!"
"Are you saying I do not know what I am talking about?"
No, the boy could not possibly be saying that because if anyone knew ab
out the tattoo it was he Drioli. Had he not, only last month, covered a man

's whole belly with the most wonderful and delicate design composed entirel
y of flowers? What about the client who had had so much hair upon his chest
that he had done him a picture of a grizzly bear so designed that the hair
on the chest became the furry coat of the bear? Could he not draw the like
ness of a lady and position it with such subtlety upon a man's arm that whe
n the muscle of the arm was flexed the lady came to life and performed some
astonishing contortions?
"All I am saying," the boy told him, "is that you are drunk and this is a d
runken idea."
"We could have Josi' for a model. A study of Josie upon my back. Am I n
ot entitled to a picture of my wife upon my back?"
"Of Josie?"
"Yes." Drioli knew he only had to mention his wife and the boy's thick b
rown lips would loosen and begin to quiver.
"No," the girl said.
"Darling Josie, please. Take this bottle and finish it, then you will feel
more generous. It is an enormous idea. Never in my life have I had such an id
ea before."
"What idea?"
"That he should make a picture of you upon my back. Am I not entitled to
that?"
"A picture of me?"
"A nude study," the boy said. "It is an agreeable idea."
"Not nude," the girl said.
"It is an enormous idea," Drioli said.
:'It's a damn crazy idea," the girl said.
'It is in any event an idea," the boy said. "It is an idea that calls for a cele
bration."
They emptied another bottle among them. Then the boy said, "It is no good
. I could not possibly manage the tattoo. Instead, I will paint this picture
on your back and you will have it with you so long as you do not take a bath
and wash it off. If you never take a bath again in your life then you will ha
ve it always, as long as you live."
"No," Drioli said.
"Yes--and on the day that you decide to take a bath I will know that you d
o not any longer value my picture. It will be a test of your admiration for my
art."
"I do not like the idea," the girl said. "His admiration for your art is so
great that he would be unclean for many years. Let us have the tattoo. But not
nude."
"Then just the head," Drioli said.
"I could not manage it."

"It is immensely simple. I will undertake to teach you in two minutes. Yo
u will see. I shall go now and fetch the instruments. The needles and the ink
s. I have inks of many different colours--as many different colours as you ha
ve paints, and far more beautiful..
"It is impossible."
"I have many inks. Have I not many different colours of inks, Josie?"
"Yes."
"You will see," Drioli said. "I will go now and fetch them." He got up fr
om his chair and walked unsteadily, but with determination, out of the room.
In half an hour Drioli was back. "I have brought everything," he cried, wav
ing a brown suitcase. "All the necessities of the tattooist are here in this ba
g."
He placed the bag on the table, opened it, and laid out the electric nee
dles and the small bottles of coloured inks. He plugged in the electric need
le, then he took the instrument in his hand and pressed a switch. It made a
buzzing sound and the quarter inch of needle that projected from the end of
it began to vibrate swiftly up and down. He threw off his jacket and rolled
up his sleeve. "Now look. Watch me and I will show you how easy it is. I wil
l make a design on my arm, here."
His forearm was already covered with blue markings, but he selected a s
mall clear patch of skin upon which to demonstrate.
"First, I choose my ink--let us use ordinary blue--and I dip the point of
the needle in the ink... so... and I hold the needle up straight and I run it
lightly over the surface of the skin like this... and with the little motor an
d the electricity, the needle jumps up and down and punctures the skin and the
ink goes in and there you are. See how easy it is... see how I draw a picture
of a greyhound here upon my arm... The boy was intrigued. "Now let me practis
e a little--on your arm."
With the buzzing needle he began to draw blue lines upon Drioli's arm. "It
is simple," he said. "It is like drawing with pen and ink. There is no differ
ence except that it is slower."
"There is nothing to it. Are you ready? Shall we begin?"
"At once."
"The model!" cried Drioli. "Come on, Josie!" He was in a bustle of ent
husiasm now, tottering around the room arranging everything, like a child
preparing for some exciting game. "Where will you have her? Where shall sh
e stand?"
"Let her be standing there, by my dressingtable. Let her be brushing her h
air. I will paint her with her hair down over her shoulders and her brushing i
t."
"Tremendous. You are a genius."
Reluctantly, the girl walked over and stood by the dressing table, carryin

g her glass of wine with her.
Drioli pulled off his shirt and stepped out of his trousers. He retained
only his underpants and his socks and shoes, and he stood there swaying gen
tly from side to side, his small body firm, white-skinned, almost hairless.
"Now," he said, "I am the canvas. Where will you place your canvas?"
"As always, upon the easel."
"Don't be crazy. I am the canvas."
"Then place yourself upon the easel. That is where you belong."
"How can I?"
"Are you the canvas or are you not the canvas?"
"I am the canvas. Already I begin to feel like a canvas."
"Then place yourself upon the easel. There should be no difficulty."
"Truly, it is not possible."
"Then sit on the chair. Sit back to front, then you can lean your drunken
head against the back of it. Hurry now, for I am about to commence."
"I am ready. I am waiting."
"First," the boy said, "I shall make an ordinary painting. Then, if it ple
ases me, I shall tattoo over it." With a wide brush he began to paint upon the
naked skin of the man's back.
"Ayee! Ayee!" Drioli screamed. "A monstrous centipede is marching do
wn my spine!"
"Be still now! Be still!" The boy worked rapidly, applying the paint only
in a thin blue wash so that it would not afterwards interfere with the proce
ss of tattooing. His concentration, as soon as he began to paint, was so grea
t that it appeared somehow to supersede his drunkenness. He applied the brush
strokes with quick jabs of the arm, holding the wrist stiff, and in less tha
n half an hour it was finished.
"All right. That's all," he said to the girl, who immediately returned to th
e couch, lay down, and fell asleep.
Drioli remained awake. He watched the boy take up the needle and dip it
in the ink; then he felt the sharp tickling sting as it touched the skin o
f his back. The pain, which was unpleasant but never extreme, kept him from
going to sleep. By following the track of the needle and by watching the d
ifferent colours of ink that the boy was using, Drioli amused himself tryin
g to visualize what was going on behind him. The boy worked with an astonis
hing intensity. He appeared to have become completely absorbed in the littl
e machine and in the unusual effects it was able to produce.
Far into the small hours of the morning the machine buzzed and the boy w
orked. Dnoli could remember that when the artist finally stepped back and sa
id, "It is finished," there was daylight outside and the sound of people wal
king in the street.
"I want to see it," Drioli said. The boy held up a mirror, at an angle, and

Drioli craned his neck to look.
"Good God!" he cried. It was a startling sight. The whole of his back, f
rom the top of the shoulders to the base of the spine, was a blaze of colour
--gold and green and blue and black and scarlet. The tattoo was applied so h
eavily it looked almost like an impasto. The boy had followed as closely as
possible the original brush strokes, filling them in solid, and it was marve
llous the way he had made use of the spine and the protrusion of the shoulde
r blades so that they became part of the composition. What is more, he had s
omehow managed to achieve--even with this slow process--a certain spontaneit
y. The portrait was quite alive; it contained much of that twisted, tortured
quality so characteristic of Soutine's other work. It was not a good likene
ss. It was a mood rather than a likeness, the model's face vague and tipsy,
the background swirling around her head in a mass of dark-green curling strokes.
"It's tremendous!"
"I rather like it myself." The boy stood back, examining it critically. "
You know," he added, "I think it's good enough for me to sign." And taking up
the buzzer again, he inscribed his name in red ink on the right-hand side, o
ver the place where Drioli's kidney was.
The old man who was called Drioli was standing in a sort of trance, starin
g at the painting in the window of the picture-dealer's shop. It had been so l
ong ago, all that almost as though it had happened in another life.
And the boy? What had become of him? He could remember now that after
returning from the war--the first war--he had missed him and had questio
ned Josie.
"Where is my little Kalmuck?"
"He is gone," she had answered. "I do not know where, but I heard it sa
id that a dealer had taken him up and sent him away to CŽret to make more p
aintings."
"Perhaps he will return."
"Perhaps he will. Who knows?"
That was the last time they had mentioned him. Shortly afterwards they
had moved to Le Havre where there were more sailors and business was bett
er. The old man smiled as he remembered Le Havre. Those were the pleasant
years, the years between the wars, with the small shop near the docks and
the comfortable rooms and always enough work, with every day three, four,
five sailors coming and wanting pictures on their arms. Those were truly t
he pleasant years.
Then had come the second war, and Josie being killed, and the Germans ar
riving, and that was the finish of his business. No one had wanted pictures
on their arms any more after that. And by that time he was too old for any o
ther kind of work. In desperation he had made his way back to Paris, hoping
vaguely that things would be easier in the big city. But they were not.

And now, after the war was over, he possessed neither the means nor the
energy to start up his small business again. It wasn't very easy for an old
man to know what to do, especially when one did not like to beg. Yet how els
e could he keep alive?
Well, he thought, still staring at the picture. So that is my little Kal
muck. And how quickly the sight of one small object such as this can stir th
e memory. Up to a few moments ago he had even forgotten that he had a tattoo
on his back. It had been ages since he had thought about it. He put his fac
e closer to the window and looked into the gallery. On the walls he could se
e many other pictures and all seemed to be the work of the same artist. Ther
e were a great number of people strolling around. Obviously it was a special
exhibition.
On a sudden impulse, Drioli turned, pushed open the door of the gallery a
nd went in.
It was a long room with thick wine-coloured carpet, and by God how beau
tiful and warm it was! There were all these people strolling about looking
at the pictures, well-washed dignified people, each of whom held a catalogu
e in the hand. Drioli stood just inside the door, nervously glancing around
, wondering whether he dared go forward and mingle with this crowd. But bef
ore he had had time to gather his courage, he heard a voice beside him sayi
ng, "What is it you want?"
The speaker wore a black morning coat. He was plump and short and had a
very white face. It was a flabby face with so much flesh upon it that the
cheeks hung down on either side of the mouth in two fleshy collops, spaniel
wise. He came up close to Drioli and said again, "What is it you want?"
Drioli stood still.
"If you please," the man was saying, "take yourself out of my gallery."
"Am I not permitted to look at the pictures?"
"I have asked you to leave."
Drioli stood his ground. He felt suddenly overwhelmingly outraged.
"Let us not have trouble," the man was saying. "Come on now, this way."
He put a fat white paw on Drioli's arm and began to push him firmly to the
door.
That did it. "Take your goddam hands off me!" Drioli shouted. His voice r
ang clear down the long gallery and all the heads jerked around as one--all t
he startled faces stared down the length of the room at the person who had ma
de this noise. A flunkey came running over to help, and the two men tried to
hustle Drioli through the door. The people stood still, watching the struggle
. Their faces expressed only a mild interest, and seemed to be saying, "It's
all right. There's no danger to us. It's being taken care of."
"I, too!" Drioli was shouting. "I, too, have a picture by this painter! He
was my friend and I have a picture which he gave me!"

"He's mad."
"A lunatic. A raving lunatic."
"Someone should call the police."
With a rapid twist of the body Drioli suddenly jumped clear of the two m
en, and before anyone could stop him he was running down the gallery shoutin
g, "I'll show you! I'll show you! I'll show you!" He flung off his overcoat,
then his jacket and shirt, and he turned so that his naked back was towards
the people.
"There!" he cried, breathing quickly. "You see? There it is!"
There was a sudden absolute silence in the room, each person arrested in
what he was doing, standing motionless in a kind of shocked, uneasy bewilde
rment. They were staring at the tattooed picture. It was still there, the co
lours as bright as ever, but the old man's back was thinner now, the shoulde
r blades protruded more sharply, and the effect, though not great, was to gi
ve the picture a curiously wrinkled, squashed appearance.
Somebody said, "My God, but it is!"
Then came the excitement and the noise of voices as the people surged f
orward to crowd around the old man.
"It is unmistakable!"
"His early manner, yes?"
"It is fantastic, fantastic!"
"And look, it is signed!"
"Bend your shoulders forward, my friend, so that the picture stretches out
flat."
"Old one, when was this done?"
"In 1913," Drioli said, without turning around. "In the autumn of 1913."
"Who taught Soutine to tattoo?"
"I taught him."
"And the woman?"
"She was my wife."
The gallery owner was pushing through the crowd towards Drioli. He was c
alm now, deadly serious, making a smile with his mouth. "Monsieur," he said,
"I will buy it." Drioli could see the loose fat upon the face vibrating as
he moved his jaw. "I said I will buy it, Monsieur."
"How can you buy it?" Drioli asked softly.
"I will give two hundred thousand francs for it." The dealer's eyes were
small and dark, the wings of his broad nose-base were beginning to quiver.
"Don't do it!" someone murmured in the crowd. "It is worth twenty times
as much."
Drioli opened his mouth to speak. No words came, so he shut it; then he o
pened it again and said slowly. "But how can I sell it?" He lifted his hands,
let them drop loosely to his sides. "Monsieur, how can I possibly sell it?"

All the sadness in the world was in his voice.
"Yes!" they were saying in the crowd. "How can he sell it? It is part of hi
mself!"
"Listen," the dealer said, coming up close. "I will help you, I will mak
e you rich. Together we shall make some private arrangement over this Pictur
e, no?"
Drioli watched him with slow, apprehensive eyes. "But how can you buy
it, Monsieur? What will you do with it when you have bought it? Where wi
ll you keep it? Where will you keep it tonight? And where tomorrow?"
"Ah, where will I keep it? Yes, where will I keep it? Now, where will I k
eep it? Well, now... " The dealer stroked the bridge of his nose with a fat w
hite finger. "It would seem," he said, "that if I take the picture, I take yo
u also. That is a disadvantage." He paused and stroked his nose again. "The p
icture itself is of no value until you are dead. How old are you, my friend?"
"Sixty-one."
"But you are perhaps not very robust, no?" The dealer lowered the hand
from his nose and looked Drioli up and down, slowly, like a farmer appraisi
ng an old horse.
"I do not like this," Drioli said, edging away. "Quite honestly, Monsieu
r, I do not like it." He edged straight into the arms of a tall man who put
out his hands and caught him gently by the shoulders. Drioli glanced around
and apologized. The man smiled down at him, patting one of the old fellow's
naked shoulders reassuringly with a hand encased in a canarycoloured glove.
"Listen, my friend," the stranger said, still smiling. "Do you like to swim
and to bask yourself in the sun?"
Drioli looked up at him, rather startled.
"Do you like fine food and red wine from the great ch‰teaux of Bordeaux
?" The man was still smiling, showing strong white teeth with a flash of go
ld among them. He spoke in a soft coaxing manner, one gloved hand still res
ting on Drioli's shoulder. "Do you like such things?"
"Well yes," Drioli answered, still greatly perplexed. "Of course."
"And the company of beautiful women?"
"Why not?"
"And a cupboard full of suits and shirts made to your own personal measu
rements? It would seem that you are a little lacking for clothes."
Drioli watched this suave man, waiting for the rest of the proposition.
"Have you ever had a shoe constructed especially for your own foot?"
"You would like that?"
"Well... "And a man who will shave you in the mornings and trim your ha
ir?"
Drioli simply stood and gaped.
"And a plump attractive girl to manicure the nails of your fingers?"

Someone in the crowd giggled.
"And a bell beside your bed to summon your maid to bring your breakfas
t in the morning? Would you like these things, my friend? Do they appeal t
o you?"
Drioli stood still and looked at him.
"You see, I am the owner of the Hotel Bristol in Cannes. I now invite y
ou to come down there and live as my guest for the rest of your life in lux
ury and comfort." The man paused, allowing his listener time to savour this
cheerful prospect. "Your only duty--shall I call it your pleasure--will be
to spend your time on my beach in bathing trunks, walking among my guests,
sunning yourself, swimming, drinking cocktails. You would like that?"
There was no answer.
"Don't you see all the guests will thus be able to observe this fascinati
ng picture by Soutine. You will become famous, and men will say, 'Look, there
is the fellow with ten million francs upon his back.' You like this idea, Mo
nsieur? It pleases you?"
Drioli looked up at the tall man in the canary gloves, still wondering whe
ther this was some sort of a joke. "It is a comical idea," he said slowly. "Bu
t do you really mean it?"
"Of course I mean it."
"Wait." the dealer interrupted. "See here, old one. Here is the answer to
our problem. I will buy the picture, and I will arrange with a surgeon to re
move the skin from your back, and then you will be able to go off on your own
and enjoy the great sum of money I shall give you for it."
"With no skin on my back?"
"No, no, please! You misunderstand. This surgeon will put a new piece of s
kin in the place of the old one. It is simple."
"Could he do that?"
"There is nothing to it."
"Impossible!" said the man with the canary gloves. "He's too old for such
a major skingrafting operation. It would kill him. It would kill you, my fri
end."
"It would kill me?"
"Naturally. You would never survive. Only the picture would come throu
gh."
"In the name of God!" Drioli cried. He looked around aghast at the face
s of the people watching him, and in the silence that followed, another man
's voice, speaking quietly from the back of the group, could be heard sayin
g, "Perhaps, if one were to offer this old man enough money, he might conse
nt to kill himself on the spot. Who knows?" A few people sniggered. The dea
ler moved his feet uneasily on the carpet.
Then the hand in the canary glove was tapping Drioli again upon the sh

oulder. "Come on," the man was saying, smiling his broad white smile. "You
and I will go and have a good dinner and we can talk about it some more w
hile we eat. How's that? Are you hungry?"
Drioli watched him, frowning. He didn't like the man's long flexible neck
, or the way he craned it forward at you when he spoke, like a snake.
"Roast duck and Chamberlin," the man was saying. He put a rich succulen
t accent on the words, splashing them out with his tongue. "And perhaps a s
oufflŽ aux marrons, light and frothy."
Drioli's eyes turned up towards the ceiling, his lips became loose and wet
. One could see the poor old fellow beginning literally to drool at the mouth.
"How do you like your duck?" the man went on. "Do you like it very brown
and crisp outside, or shall it be...
"I am coming," Drioli said quickly. Already he had picked up his shirt a
nd was pulling it frantically over his head. "Wait for me, Monsieur. I am co
ming." And within a minute he had disappeared out of the gallery with his ne
w patron.
It wasn't more than a few weeks later that a picture by Soutine, of a wom
an's head, painted in an unusual manner, nicely framed and heavily varnished,
turned up for sale in Buenos Aires. That and the fact that there is no hotel
in Cannes called Bristol--causes one to wonder a little, and to pray for the
old man's health, and to hope fervently that wherever he may be at this mome
nt, there is a plump attractive girl to manicure the nails of his fingers, an
d a maid to bring him his breakfast in bed in the mornings.

Poison
IT must have been around midnight when I drove home, and as I approached
the gates of the bungalow I switched off the headlamps of the car so the
beam wouldn't swing in through the window of the side bedroom and wake Ha
rry Pope. But I needn't have bothered. Coming up the drive I noticed his
light was still on, so he was awake anyway unless perhaps he'd dropped of
f while reading.
I parked the car and went up the five steps to the balcony, counting each
step carefully in the dark so I wouldn't take an extra one which wasn't there
when I got to the top. I crossed the balcony, pushed through the screen doors
into the house itself and switched on the light in the hall. I went across to
the door of Harry's room, opened it quietly, and looked in.
He was lying on the bed and I could see he was awake. But he didn't mo
ve. He didn't even turn his head towards me, but I heard him say, "Timber,

Timber, come here."
He spoke slowly, whispering each word carefully, separately, and I pushe
d the door right open and started to go quickly across the room.
"Stop, wait a moment, Timber." I could hardly hear what he was saying.
He seemed to be straining enormously to get the words out. "What's the matt
er, Harry?"
"Sshhh!" he whispered. "Sshhh! For God's sake don't make a noise. Take
your shoes off before you come nearer. Please do as I say, Timber."
The way he was speaking reminded me of George Barling after he got sho
t in the stomach when he stood leaning against a crate containing a spare
aeroplane engine, holding both hands on his stomach and saying things abou
t the German pilot in just the same hoarse straining half whisper Harry wa
s using now.
"Quickly, Timber, but take your shoes off first."
I couldn't understand about taking off the shoes but I figured that if he
was as ill as he sounded I'd better humour him, so I bent down and removed t
he shoes and left them in the middle of the floor. Then I went over to his be
d.
"Don't touch the bed! For God's sake don't touch the bed!" He was still
speaking like he'd been shot in the stomach and I could see him lying there
on his back with a single sheet covering three-quarters of his body. He was
wearing a pair of pyjamas with blue, brown, and white stripes, and he was sw
eating terribly. It was a hot night and I was sweating a little myself, but
not like Harry. His whole face was wet and the pillow around his head was so
dden with moisture. It looked like a bad go of malaria to me.
"What is it, Harry?"
"A krait," he said. "A krait! Oh, my God! Where'd it bite you? How long
ago?"
"Shut up," he whispered.
"Listen, Harry," I said, and I leaned forward and touched his shoulder.
"We've got to be quick. Come on now, quickly, tell me where it bit you." He
was lying there very still and tense as though he was holding on to himself
hard because of sharp pain.
"I haven't been bitten," he whispered. "Not yet. It's on my stomach. Lying
there asleep."
I took a quick pace backwards, I couldn't help it, and I stared at his sto
mach or rather at the sheet that covered it. The sheet was rumpled in several
places and it was impossible to tell if there was anything underneath.
"You don't really mean there's a krait lying on your stomach now?"
"I swear it."
"How did it get there?" I shouldn't have asked the question because it was
easy to see he wasn't fooling. I should have told him to keep quiet.

"I was reading," Harry said, and he spoke very slowly, taking each word
in turn and speaking it carefully so as not to move the muscles of his sto
mach. "Lying on my back reading and I felt something on my chest, behind th
e book. Sort of tickling. Then out of the corner of my eye saw this little
krait sliding over my pyjamas. Small, about ten inches. Knew I mustn't move
. Couldn't have anyway. Lay there watching it. Thought it would go over the
top of the sheet." Harry paused and was silent for a few moments. His eyes
looked down along his body towards the place where the sheet covered his s
tomach, and I could see he was watching to make sure his whispering wasn't
disturbing the thing that lay there.
"There was a fold in the sheet," he said, speaking more slowly than ever
now and so softly I had to lean close to hear him. "See it, it's still there.
It went under that. I could feel it through my pyjamas, moving on my stomach
. Then it stopped moving and now it's lying there in the warmth. Probably asl
eep. I've been waiting for you." He raised his eyes and looked at me.
"How long ago?"
"Hours," he whispered. "Hours and bloody hours and hours. I can't keep s
till much longer. I've been wanting to cough."
There was not much doubt about the truth of Harry's story. As a matter o
f fact it wasn't a surprising thing for a krait to do. They hang around peop
le's houses and they go for the warm places. The surprising thing was that H
arry hadn't been bitten. The bite is quite deadly except sometimes when you
catch it at once and they kill a fair number of people each year in Bengal,
mostly in the villages.
"All right, Harry," I said, and now I was whispering too. "Don't move and
don't talk any more unless you have to. You know it won't bite unless it's fri
ghtened. We'll fix it in no time."
I went softly out of the room in my stocking feet and fetched a small sh
arp knife from the kitchen. I put it in my trouser pocket ready to use insta
ntly in case something went wrong while we were still thinking out a plan. I
f Harry coughed or moved or did something to frighten the krait and got bitt
en, I was going to be ready to cut the bitten place and try to suck the veno
m out. I came back to the bedroom and Harry was still lying very quiet and s
weating all over his face. His eyes followed me as I moved across the room t
o his bed and I could see he was wondering what I'd been up to. I stood besi
de him, trying to think of the best thing to do.
"Harry," I said, and now when I spoke I put my mouth almost on his ear so
I wouldn't have to raise my voice above the softest whisper, "I think the be
st thing to do is for me to draw the sheet back very, very gently. Then we co
uld have a look first. I think I could do that without disturbing it."
"Don't be a damn fool." There was no expression in his voice. He spoke e
ach word too slowly, too carefully, and too softly for that. The expression

was in the eyes and around the corners of the mouth.
"Why not?"
"The light would frighten him. It's dark under there now."
"Then how about whipping the sheet back quick and brushing it off before
it had time to strike?"
"Why don't you get a doctor?" Harry said. The way he looked at me told m
e I should have thought of that myself in the first place.
"A doctor. Of course. That's it. I'll get Ganderbai."
I tiptoed out to the hail, looked up Ganderbai's number in the book, lifted
the phone and told the operator to hurry.
"Dr Ganderbai," I said. "This is Timber Woods."
"Hello, Mr Woods. You not in bed yet?"
"Look, could you come round at once? And bring serum--for a krait bite."
"Who's been bitten?" The question came so sharply it was like a small ex
plosion in my ear.
"No one. No one yet. But Harry Pope's in bed and he's got one lying on h
is stomach asleep under the sheet lying on his stomach."
For about three seconds there was silence on the line. Then speaking slo
wly, not like an explosion now but slowly, precisely, Ganderbai said, "Tell
him to keep quite still. He is not to move or to talk. Do you understand?"
"Of course."
"I'll come at once!" He rang off and I went back to the bedroom. Harry's
eyes watched me as I walked across to his bed.
"Ganderbai's coming. He said for you to lie still."
"What in God's name does he think I'm doing!"
"Look, Harry, he said no talking. Absolutely no talking. Either of us."
"Why don't you shut up then?" When he said this one side of his mouth st
arted twitching with rapid little downward movements that continued for a wh
ile after he finished speaking. I took out my handkerchief and very gently I
wiped the sweat off his face and neck, and I could feel the slight twitchin
g of the muscle--the one he used for smiling--as my fingers passed over it w
ith the handkerchief.
I slipped out to the kitchen, got some ice from the ice-box, rolled it up i
n a napkin, and began to crush it small. That business of the mouth, I didn't l
ike that. Or the way he talked, either. I carried the ice pack to the bedroom a
nd laid it across Harry's forehead.
"Keep you cool."
He screwed up his eyes and drew breath sharply through his teeth. "Tak
e it away," he whispered. "Make me cough." His smilingmuscle began to twit
ch again.
The beam of a headlamp shone through the window as Ganderbai's car swu

ng around to the front of the bungalow. I went out to meet him, holding th
e ice pack with both hands.
"How is it?" Ganderbai asked, but he didn't stop to talk; he walked on
past me across the balcony and through the screen doors into the hail. "Whe
re is he? Which room?"
He put his bag down on a chair in the hail and followed me into Harry's
room. He was wearing soft-soled bedroom slippers and he walked across the
floor noiselessly, delicately, like a careful cat. Harry watched him out of
the sides of his eyes. When Ganderbai reached the bed he looked down at Ha
rry and smiled, confident and reassuring, nodding his head to tell Harry it
was a simple matter and he was not to worry but just to leave it to Dr Gan
derbai. Then he turned and went back to the hail and I followed him.
"First thing is to try and get some of the serum into him," he said, and
he opened his bag and started to make preparations. "Intravenously. But I mus
t do it neatly. Don't want to make him flinch."
We went into the kitchen and he sterilized a needle. He had a hypodermic
syringe in one hand and a small bottle in the other and he stuck the needle
through the rubber top and began drawing a pale yellow liquid up into the s
yringe by pulling out the plunger. Then he handed the syringe to me.
"Hold that till I ask for it."
He picked up the bag and together we returned to the room. Harry's eye
s were bright now and wide open. Ganderbai bent over Harry and very cautio
usly, like a man handling sixteenth-century lace, he rolled up the pyjama
sleeve to the elbow without moving the arm. I noticed he stood well away f
rom the bed.
He whispered, "I'm going to give you an injection. Serum. Just a prick b
ut try not to move. Don't tighten your stomach muscles. Let them go limp."
Harry looked at the syringe.
Ganderbai took a piece of red rubber tubing from his bag and slid one en
d up and around Harry's biceps; then he tied the tubing tight with a knot. H
e sponged a small area of the bare forearm with alcohol, handed the swab to
me and took the syringe from my hand. He held it up to the light, squinting
at the calibrations, squirting out some of the yellow fluid. I stood beside
him, watching. Harry was watching too and sweating all over his face so it s
hone like it was smeared thick with face cream melting on his skin and runni
ng down on to the pillow.
I could see the blue vein on the inside of Harry's forearm, swollen now
because of the tourniquet, and then I saw the needle above the vein, Ganderb
ai holding the syringe almost flat against the arm, sliding the needle in si
deways through the skin into the blue vein, sliding it slowly but so firmly
it went in smooth as into cheese. Harry looked at the ceiling and closed his
eyes and opened them again, but he didn't move.

When it was finished Ganderbai leaned forward putting his mouth close to
Harry's ear. "Now you'll be all right even if you are bitten. But don't mov
e. Please don't move. I'll be back in a moment."
He picked up his bag and went out to the hail and I followed.
"Is he safe now?" I asked.
"How safe is he?"
The little Indian doctor stood there in the hall rubbing his lower lip.
"It must give him some protection, mustn't it?" I asked.
He turned away and walked to the screen doors that led on to the veranda
h. I thought he was going through them, but he stopped this side of the door
s and stood looking out into the night.
"Isn't the serum very good?" I asked.
"Unfortunately not," he answered without turning round. "It might save hi
m. It might not. I am trying to think of something else to do."
"Shall we draw the sheet back and brush it off before it has any time to st
rike?"
"Never! We are not entitled to take a risk." He spoke sharply and his voic
e was pitched a little higher than usual.
"We can't very well leave him lying there," I said. "He's getting nervous."
"Please! Please!" he said, turning round, holding both hands up in the ai
r. "Not so fast, please. This is not a matter to rush into baldheaded." He wi
ped his forehead with his handkerchief and stood there, frowning, nibbling hi
s lip.
"You see," he said at last. "There is a way to do this. You know what we
must do--we must administer an anaesthetic to the creature where it lies."
It was a splendid idea.
"It is not safe," he continued, "because a snake is cold blooded and anae
sthetic does not work so well or so quick with such animals, but it is better
than any other thing to do. We could use ether... chloroform... " He was spe
aking slowly and trying to think the thing out while he talked.
"Which shall we use?"
"Chloroform," he said suddenly. "Ordinary chloroform. That is best. No
w quick!" He took my arm and pulled me towards the balcony. "Drive to my h
ouse! By the time you get there I will have waked up my boy on the telepho
ne and he will show you my poisons cupboard. Here is the key of the cupboa
rd. Take a bottle of chloroform. It has an orange label and the name is pr
inted on it. I stay here in case anything happens. Be quick now, hurry! No
, no, you don't need your shoes!"
I drove fast and in about fifteen minutes I was back with the bottle of c
hloroform. Ganderbai came out of Harry's room and met me in the hail. "You go
t it?" he said. "Good, good. I've just been telling him what we are going to

do. But now we must hurry. It is not easy for him in there like that all this
time. I am afraid he might move."
He went back to the bedroom and I followed, carrying the bottle careful
ly with both hands. Harry was lying on the bed in precisely the same positi
on as before with the sweat pouring down his cheeks. His face was white and
wet. He turned his eyes towards me and I smiled at him and nodded confiden
tly. He continued to look at me. I raised my thumb, giving him the okay sig
nal. He closed his eyes. Ganderbai was squatting down by the bed, and on th
e floor beside him was the hollow rubber tube that he had previously used a
s a tourniquet, and he'd got a small paper funnel fitted into one end of th
e tube.
He began to pull a little piece of sheet out from under the mattress. He
was working directly in line with Harry's stomach, about eighteen inches fr
om it, and I watched his fingers as they tugged gently at the edge of the sh
eet. He worked so slowly it was almost impossible to discern any movement ei
ther in his fingers or in the sheet that was being pulled.
Finally he succeeded in making an opening under the sheet and he took th
e rubber tube and inserted one end of it in the opening so that it would sli
de under the sheet along the mattress towards Harry's body. I do not know ho
w long it took him to slide that tube in a few inches. It may have been twen
ty minutes, it may have been forty. I never once saw the tube move. I knew i
t was going in because the visible part of it grew shorter, but I doubted th
at the krait could have felt even the slightest vibration. Ganderbai himself
was sweating now, large pearls of sweat standing out all over his forehead
and along his upper lip. But his hands were steady and I noticed that his ey
es were watching, not the tube in his hands, but the area of crumpled sheet
above Harry's stomach.
Without looking up, he held out a hand to me for the chloroform. I twist
ed out the ground-glass stopper and put the whole bottle right into his hand
, not letting go until I was sure he had a good hold on it. Then he jerked h
is head for me to come closer and he whispered, "Tell him I'm going to soak
the mattress and that it will be very cold under his body. He must be ready
for that and he must not move. Tell him now."
I bent over Harry and passed on the message.
"Why doesn't he get on with it?" Harry said.
"He's going to now, Harry. But it'll feel very cold, so be ready for it."
"Oh, God Almighty, get on, get on!" For the first time he raised his voi
ce, and Ganderbai glanced up sharply, watched him for a few seconds, then we
nt back to his business.
Ganderbai poured a few drops of chloroform into the paper funnel and w
aited while it ran down the tube. Then he poured some more. Then he waited
again, and the heavy sickening smell of chloroform spread out all over th

e room bringing with it faint unpleasant memories of white-coated nurses a
nd white surgeons standing in a white room around a long white table. Gand
erbai was pouring steadily now and I could see the heavy vapour of the chl
oroform swirling slowly like smoke above the paper funnel. He paused, held
the bottle up to the light, poured one more funnelful and handed the bott
le back to me. Slowly he drew out the rubber tube from under the sheet; th
en he stood up.
The strain of inserting the tube and pouring the chloroform must have bee
n great, and I recollect that when Ganderbai turned and whispered to me, his
voice was small and tired. "We'll give it fifteen minutes. Just to be safe."
I leaned over to tell Harry, "We're going to give it fifteen minutes, just t
o be safe. But it's probably done for already."
"Then why for God's sake don't you look and see!" Again he spoke loudly
and Ganderbai sprang round, his small brown face suddenly very angry. He h
ad almost pure black eyes and he stared at Harry and Harry's smiling-muscle
started to twitch. I took my handkerchief and wiped his wet face, trying t
o stroke his forehead a little for comfort as I did so. Then we stood and w
aited beside the bed, Ganderbai watching Harry's face all the time in a cur
ious intense manner. The little Indian was concentrating all his will power
on keeping Harry quiet. He never once took his eyes from the patient and a
lthough he made no sound, he seemed somehow to be shouting at him all the t
ime, saying: Now listen, you've got to listen, you're not going to go spoil
ing this now, d'you hear me; and Harry lay there twitching his mouth, sweat
ing, closing his eyes, opening them, looking at me, at the sheet, at the ce
iling, at me again, but never at Ganderbai. Yet somehow Ganderbai was holdi
ng him. The smell of chloroform was oppressive and it made me feel sick, bu
t I couldn't leave the room now. I had the feeling someone was blowing up a
huge balloon and I could see it was going to burst, but I couldn't look away.
At length Ganderbai turned and nodded and I knew he was ready to proceed
. "You go over to one side of the bed," he said. "We will each take one side
of the sheet and draw it back together, but very slowly, please, and very q
uietly."
"Keep still now, Harry," I said and I went around to the other side of t
he bed and took hold of the sheet. Ganderbai stood opposite me, and together
we began to draw back the sheet, lifting it up clear of Harry's body, takin
g it back very slowly, both of us standing well away but at the same time be
nding forward, trying to peer underneath it. The smell of chloroform was awf
ul. I remember trying to hold my breath and when I couldn't do that any long
er I tried to breathe shallow so the stuff wouldn't get into my lungs.
The whole of Harry's chest was visible now, or rather the striped pyjama
top which covered it, and then I saw the white cord of his pyjama trousers,
neatly tied in a bow. A little farther and I saw a button, a mother-of-pear

l button, and that was something I had never had on my pyjamas, a fly button
, let alone a mother-of-pearl one. This Harry, I thought, he is very refined
. It is odd how one sometimes has frivolous thoughts at exciting moments, an
d I distinctly remember thinking about Harry being very refined when I saw t
hat button.
Apart from the button there was nothing on his stomach.
We pulled the sheet back faster then, and when we had uncovered his legs
and feet we let the sheet drop over the end of the bed on to the floor.
"Don't move," Ganderbai said, "don't move, Mr Pope"; and he began to pe
er around along the side of Harry's body and under his legs.
"We must be careful," he said. "It may be anywhere. It could be up the le
g of his pyjamas."
When Ganderbai said this, Harry quickly raised his head from the pillow
and looked down at his legs. It was the first time he had moved. Then sudd
enly he jumped up, stood on his bed and shook his legs one after the other
violently in the air. At that moment we both thought he had been bitten and
Ganderbai was already reaching down into his bag for a scalpel and a tourn
iquet when Harry ceased his caperings and stood still and looked down at th
e mattress he was standing on and shouted, "It's not there!"
Ganderbai straightened up and for a moment he too looked at the mattress
; then he looked up at Harry. Harry was all right. He hadn't been bitten and
now he wasn't going to get bitten and he wasn't going to be killed and ever
ything was fine. But that didn't seem to make anyone feel any better.
"Mr Pope, you are of course quite sure you saw it in the first place?"
There was a note of sarcasm in Ganderbai's voice that he would never have e
mployed in ordinary circumstances. "You don't think you might possibly have
been dreaming, do you, Mr Pope?" The way Ganderbai was looking at Harry, I
realized that the sarcasm was not seriously intended. He was only easing u
p a bit after the strain.
Harry stood on his bed in his striped pyjamas, glaring at Ganderbai, and t
he colour began to spread out all over his cheeks.
"Are you telling me I'm a liar?" he shouted.
Ganderb ai remained absolutely still, watching Harry. Harry took a pace
forward on the bed and there was a shining look in his eyes.
"Why, you dirty little Hindu sewer rat!"
"Shut up, Harry!" I said.
"You dirty black-- "Harry!" I called. "Shut up, Harry!" It was terrible the
things he was saying.
Ganderbai went out of the room as though neither of us was there and I
followed him and put my arm around his shoulder as he walked across the hai
l and out on to the balcony.
"Don't you listen to Harry," I said. "This thing's made him so he doesn't

know what he's saying."
We went down the steps from the balcony to the drive and across the dri
ve in the darkness to where his old Morris car was parked. He opened the do
or and got in.
"You did a wonderful job," I said. "Thank you very much for coming."
"All he needs is a good holiday," he said quietly, without looking at me,
then he started the engine and drove off.

The Wish
UNDER the palm of one hand the child became aware of the scab of an old cut
on his kneecap. He bent forward to examine it closely. A scab was always a
fascinating thing; it presented a special challenge he was never able to r
esist.
Yes, he thought, I will pick it off, even if it isn't ready, even if the middle
of it sticks, even if it hurts like anything.
With a fingernail he began to explore cautiously around the edges of the s
cab. He got a nail underneath it, and when he raised it, but ever so slightly,
it suddenly came off, the whole hard brown scab came off beautifully, leaving
an interesting little circle of smooth red skin.
Nice. Very nice indeed. He rubbed the circle and it didn't hurt. He picke
d up the scab, put it on his thigh and flipped it with a finger so that it fl
ew away and landed on the edge of the carpet, the enormous red and black and
yellow carpet that stretched the whole length of the hall from the stairs on
which he sat to the front door in the distance. A tremendous carpet. Bigger t
han the tennis lawn. Much bigger than that. He regarded it gravely, setting h
is eyes upon it with mild pleasure. He had never really noticed it before, bu
t now, all of a sudden the colours seemed to brighten mysteriously and spring
out at him in a most dazzling way. You see, he told himself, I know how it i
s. The red parts of the carpet are red-hot lumps of coal. What I must do is t
his: I must walk all the way along it to the front door without touching them
. If I touch the red I will be burnt. As a matter of fact, I will be burnt up
completely. And the black parts of the carpet... yes, the black parts are sn
akes, poisonous snakes, adders mostly, and cobras, thick like tree-trunks rou
nd the middle, and if I touch one of them, I'll be bitten and I'll die before
tea time. And if I get across safely, without being burnt and without being
bitten, I will be given a puppy for my birthday tomorrow.
He got to his feet and climbed higher up the stairs to obtain a better v
iew of this vast tapestry of colour and death. Was it possible? Was there en
ough yellow? Yellow was the only colour he was allowed to walk on. Could it

be done? This was not a journey to be undertaken lightly; the risks were far
too great for that. The child's face--a fringe of white-gold hair, two larg
e blue eyes, a small pointed chin peered down anxiously over the banisters.
The yellow was a bit thin in places and there were one or two widish gaps, b
ut it did seem to go all the way along to the other end. For someone who had
only yesterday triumphantly travelled the whole length of the brick path fr
om the stables to the summer-house without touching the cracks, this carpet
thing should not be too difficult. Except for the snakes. The mere thought o
f snakes sent a fine electricity of fear running like pins down the backs of
his legs and under the soles of his feet.
He came slowly down the stairs and advanced to the edge of the carpet. H
e extended one small sandalled foot and placed it cautiously upon a patch of
yellow. Then he brought the other foot up, and there was just enough room f
or him to stand with the two feet together. There! He had started! His brigh
t oval face was curiously intent, a shade whiter perhaps than before, and he
was holding his arms out sideways to assist his balance. He took another st
ep, lifting his foot high over a patch of black, aiming carefully with his t
oe for a narrow channel of yellow on the other side. When he had completed t
he second step he paused to rest, standing very stiff and still. The narrow
channel of yellow ran forward unbroken for at least five yards and he advanc
ed gingerly along it, bit by bit, as though walking a tightrope. Where it fi
nally curled off sideways, he had to take another long stride, this time ove
r a vicious-looking mixture of black and red. Halfway across he began to wob
ble. He waved his arms around wildly, windmill fashion, to keep his balance,
and he got across safely and rested again on the other side. He was quite b
reathless now, and so tense he stood high on his toes all the time, arms out
sideways, fists clenched. He was on a big safe island of yellow. There was
lots of room on it, he couldn't possibly fall off, and he stood there restin
g, hesitating, waiting, wishing he could stay for ever on this big safe yell
ow island. But the fear of not getting the puppy compelled him to go on. Ste
p by step, he edged further ahead, and between each one he paused to decide
exactly where he should put his foot. Once, he had a choice of ways, either
to left or right, and he chose the left because although it seemed the more
difficult, there was not so much black in that direction. The black was what
had made him nervous. He glanced quickly over his shoulder to see how far h
e had come. Nearly halfway. There could be no turning back now. He was in th
e middle and he couldn't turn back and he couldn't jump off sideways either because it
that lay ahead of him, he felt that old sudden sickening surge of panic in his
chest--like last Easter time, that afternoon when he got lost all alone in th
e darkest part of Piper's Wood.
He took another step, placing his foot carefully upon the only little pie

ce of yellow within reach, and this time the point of the foot came within a
centimetre of some black. It wasn't touching the black, he could see it wasn'
t touching, he could see the small line of yellow separating the toe of his s
andal from the black; but the snake stirred as though sensing his nearness, a
nd raised its head and gazed at the foot with bright beady eyes, watching to
see if it was going to touch.
"I'm not touching you! You mustn't bite me! You know I'm not touching
you!"
Another snake slid up noiselessly beside the first, raised its head, two
heads now, two pairs of eyes staring at the foot, gazing at a little naked pl
ace just below the sandal strap where the skin showed through. The child went
high up on his toes and stayed there, frozen stiff with terror. It was minut
es before he dared to move again.
The next step would have to be a really long one. There was this deep cur
ling river of black that ran clear across the width of the carpet, and he was
forced by his position to cross it at its widest part. He thought first of t
rying to jump it, but decided he couldn't be sure of landing accurately on th
e narrow band of yellow on the other side. He took a deep breath, lifted one
foot, and inch by inch he pushed it out in front of him, far far out, then do
wn and down until at last the tip of his sandal was across and resting safely
on the edge of the yellow. He leaned forward, transferring his weight to his
front foot. Then he tried to bring the back foot up as well. He strained and
pulled and jerked his body, but the legs were too wide apart and he couldn't
make it. He tried to get back again. He couldn't do that either. He was doin
g the splits and he was properly stuck. He glanced down and saw this deep cur
ling river of black underneath him. Parts of it were stirring now, and uncoil
ing and beginning to shine with a dreadfully oily glister. He wobbled, waved
his arms frantically to keep his balance, but that seemed to make it worse. H
e was starting to go over. He was going over to the right, quite slowly he wa
s going over, then faster and faster, and at the last moment, instinctively h
e put out a hand to break the fall and the next thing he saw was this bare ha
nd of his going right into the middle of a great glistening mass of black and
he gave one piercing cry as it touched.
Outside in the sunshine, far away behind the house, the mother was lookin
g for her son.

Neck
WHEN, about eight years ago, old Sir William Turton died and his son Basil
inherited The Turton Press (as well as the title), I can remember how the

y started laying bets around Fleet Street as to how long it wouldbe before
some nice young woman managedto persuade the little fellow that she must
look after him. That is to say, him and his money.
The new Sir Basil Turton was maybe forty years old at the time, a bach
elor, a man of mild and simple character who up to then had shown no inter
est in anything at all except his collection of modern paintings and sculp
ture. No woman had disturbed him; no scandal or gossip had ever touched hi
s name. But now that he had become the proprietor of quite a large newspap
er and magazine empire, it was necessary for him to emerge from the calm o
f his father's country house and come up to London.
Naturally, the vultures started gathering at once, and I believe that not
only Fleet Street but very nearly the whole of the city was looking on eager
ly as they scrambled for the body. It was slow motion, of course, deliberate
and deadly slow motion, and therefore not so much like vultures as a bunch of
agile crabs clawing for a piece of horsemeat under water.
But to everyone's surprise the little chap proved to be remarkably elusi
ve, and the chase dragged on right through the spring and early summer of th
at year. I did not know Sir Basil personally, nor did I have any reason to f
eel friendly towards him, but I couldn't help taking the side of my own sex
and found myself cheering loudly every time he managed to get himself off th
e hook.
Then, round about the beginning of August, apparently at some secret fe
male signal, the girls declared a sort of truce among themselves while they
went abroad, and rested, and regrouped, and made fresh plans for the winte
r kill. This was a mistake because precisely at that moment a dazzling crea
ture called Natalia something or other, whom nobody had heard of before, sw
ept in from the Continent, took Sir Basil firmly by the wrist and led him o
ff in a kind of swoon to the Registry Office at Caxton Hall where she marri
ed him before anyone else, least of all the bridegroom, realized what was h
appening.
You can imagine that the London ladies were indignant, and naturally the
y started disseminating a vast amount of fruity gossip about the new Lady Tu
rton ('That dirty poacher,' they called her). But we don't have to go into t
hat. In fact, for the purposes of this story we can skip the next six years,
which brings us right up to the present, to an occasion exactly one week ag
o today when I myself had the pleasure of meeting her ladyship for the first
time. By now, as you must have guessed, she was not only running the whole
of The Turton Press, but as a result had become a considerable political for
ce in the country. I realize that other women have done this sort of thing b
efore, but what made her particular case unusual was the fact that she was a
foreigner and that nobody seemed to know precisely what country she came fr
om--Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, or Russia.

So last Thursday I went to this small dinner party at a friend's in Lo
ndon, and while we were standing around in the drawing-room before the mea
l, sipping good Martinis and talking about the atom bomb and Mr Bevan, the
maid popped her head in to announce the last guest.
"Lady Turton," she said.
Nobody stopped talking; we were too well mannered for that. No heads w
ere turned. Only our eyes swung round to the door, waiting for the entranc
e.
She came in fast--tall and slim in a red-gold dress with sparkles on it-the mouth smiling, the hand outstretched towards her hostess, and my heaven
s, I must say she was a beauty.
"Mildred, good evening!"
"My dear Lady Turton! How nice!"
I believe we did stop talking then, and we turned and stared and stood w
aiting quite meekly to be introduced, just like she might have been the Quee
n or a famous film star. But she was better looking than either of those. Th
e hair was black, and to go with it she had one of those pale, oval, innocen
t fifteenth-century Flemish faces, almost exactly a Madonna by Memling or Va
n Eyck. At least that was the first impression. Later, when my turn came to
shake hands, I got a closer look and saw that except for the outline and col
ouring it wasn't really a Madonna at all--far, far from it.
The nostrils for example were very odd, somehow more open, more flarin
g than any I had seen before, and excessively arched. This gave the whole
nose a kind of open, snorting look that had something of the wild animal a
bout it the mustang.
And the eyes when I saw them close, were not wide and round the way the
Madonna painters used to make them, but long and half-closed, half smiling,
half sullen, and slightly vulgar, so that in one way and another they gave h
er a most delicately dissipated air. What's more they didn't look at you dir
ectly. They came to you slowly from over on one side with a curious sliding
motion that made me nervous. I tried to see their colour, thought it was pal
e grey, but couldn't be sure.
Then she was led away across the room to meet other people. I stood wat
ching her. She was clearly conscious of her success and of the way these Lo
ndoners were deferring to her. 'Here am I,' she seemed to be saying, 'and I
only came over a few years ago, but already I am richer and more powerful
than any of you.' There was a little prance of triumph in her walk.
A few minutes later we went in to dinner, and to my surprise I found mys
elf seated at her ladyship's right. I presumed that our hostess had done thi
s as a kindness to me, thinking I might pick up some material for the social
column I Write each day in the evening paper. I settled myself down ready f
or an interesting meal. But the famous lady took no notice of me at all; she

spent her time talking to the man on her left; the host. Until at last, jus
t as I was finishing my ice-cream, she suddenly turned, reached over, picked
up my place card and read the name. Then, with that queer sliding motion of
the eyes she looked into my face. I smiled and made a little bow. She didn'
t smile back, but started shooting questions at me, rather personal question
s--job, age, family, things like that in a peculiar lapping voice, and I fou
nd myself answering as best I could.
During this inquisition it came out among other things that I was a lover
of painting and sculpture.
"Then you should come down to the country some time and see my husband's
collection." She said it casually, merely as a form of conversation, but yo
u must realize that in my job I cannot afford to lose an opportunity like th
is.
"How kind of you, Lady Turton. But I'd simply love to. When shall I com
e?"
Her head went up and she hesitated, frowned, shrugged her shoulders and
then said, "Oh I don't care. Any time."
"How about this next week-end? Would that be all right?"
The slow narrow eyes rested a moment on mine, then travelled away. "I su
ppose so, if you wish. I don't care."
And that was how the following Saturday afternoon I came to be driving d
own to Wooton with my suitcase in the back of the car. You may think that pe
rhaps I forced the invitation a bit, but I couldn't have got it any other wa
y. And apart from the professional aspect, I personally wanted very much to
see the house. As you know, Wooton is one of the truly great stone houses of
the early English Renaissance. Like its sisters, Longleat, Wollaton, and Mo
ntacute, it was built in the latter half of the sixteenth Qentury when for t
he first time a great man's house could be designed as a comfortable dwellin
g, not as a castle, and when a new group of architects such as John Thorpe a
nd the Smithsons were starting to do marvellous things all over the country.
It lies south of Oxford, near a small town Qalled Princes Risborough
not a long trip from London--and as I swung in through the main gates the
sky was closing overhead nd the early winter evening was beginning.
I went slowly up the long drive, trying to see As much of the grounds a
s possible, especially the famous topiary which I had heard such a bot abou
t. And I must say it was an impressive Sight. On all sides there were massi
ve yew trees, trimmed and clipped into many different Qomical shapes--hens,
pigeons, bottles, boots, , Armchairs, castles, egg-cups, lanterns, old wom
en with flaring petticoats, tall pillars, some crowned With a ball, others
with big rounded roofs and stemless mushroom finials--and in the half darkn
ess the greens had turned to black so that each figure, each tree, took on

a dark, smooth Sculptural quality. At one point I saw a lawn covered with g
igantic chessmen, each a live yew tree, marvellously fashioned. I stopped t
he car, got out and walked among them, and they were twice as tall as me. W
hat's more the set was complete, kings, queens, bishops, knights, rooks and
pawns standing in position as for the start of a game.
Around the next bend I saw the great grey house itself, and in front of i
t the large entrance forecourt enclosed by a high balustraded wall with small
pillared pavilions at its outer angles. The piers of the balustrades were su
rmounted by stone obelisks--the Italian influence on the Tudor mind--and a fl
ight of steps at least a hundred feet wide led up to the house.
As I drove into the forecourt I noticed with rather a shock that the fou
ntain basin in the middle supported a large statue by Epstein. A lovely thin
g, mind you, but surely not in sympathy with its surroundings. Then, looking
back as I climbed the stairway to the front door, I saw that on all the lit
tle lawns and terraces round about there were other modern statues and many
kinds of curious sculpture. In the distance I thought I recognized Gaudier B
rzeska, Brancusi, Saint-Gaudens, Henry Moore, and Epstein again.
The door was opened by a young footman who led me up to a bedroom on th
e first floor. Her ladyship, he explained, was resting, so were the other g
uests, but they would all be down in the main drawing-room in an hour or so
, dressed for dinner.
Now in my job it is necessary to do a lot of week-ending. I suppose I s
pend around fifty Saturdays and Sundays a year in other people's houses, an
d as a result I have become fairly sensitive to unfamiliar atmosphere. I ca
n tell good or bad almost by sniffing with my nose the moment I get in the
front door; and this one I was in now I did not like. The place smelled wro
ng. There was the faint, desiccated whiff of something troublesome in the a
ir; I was conscious of it even as I lay steaming luxuriously in my great ma
rble bath; and I couldn't help hoping that no unpleasant things were going
to happen before Monday came.
The first of them--though more of a surprise than an unpleasantness--oc
curred ten minutes later. I was sitting on the bed putting on my socks when
softly the door opened, and an ancient lopsided gnome in black tails slid
into the room. He was the butler, he explained, and his name was Jelks, and
he did so hope I was comfortable and had everything I wanted.
I told him I was and had.
He said he would do all he could to make my week-end agreeable. I thank
ed him and waited for him to go. He hesitated, and then, in a voice drippin
g with unction, he begged permission to mention a rather delicate matter. I
told him to go ahead.
To be quite frank, he said, it was about tipping. The whole business of t
ipping made him acutely miserable.

Oh? And why was that?
Well, if I really wanted to know, he didn't like the idea that his guests
felt under an obligation to tip him when they left the house--as indeed they
did. It was an undignified proceeding for the tipping and the tipped. Moreov
er, he was well aware of the anguish that was often created in the minds of g
uests such as myself, if I would pardon the liberty, who might feel compelled
by convention to give more than they could really afford.
He paused, and two small crafty eyes watched my face for a sign. I murm
ured that he needn't worry himself about such things as far as I was concer
ned.
On the contrary, he said, he hoped sincerely that I would agree from the b
eginning to give him no tip at all.
"Well," I said. "Let's not fuss about it now, and when the time comes we'l
l see how we feel."
"No, sir!" he cried. "Please, I really must insist."
So I agreed.
He thanked me, and shuffled a step or two closer. Then, laying his head
on one side and clasping his hands before him like a priest, he gave a tiny
apologetic shrug of the shoulders. The small sharp eyes were still watching
me, and I waited, one sock on, the other in my hands, trying to guess what w
as coming next.
All that he would ask, he said softly, so softly now that his voice was li
ke music heard faintly in the street outside a great concert hail, all that he
would ask was that instead of a tip I should give him thirty-three and a thir
d per cent of my winnings at cards over the week-end. If I lost there would be
nothing to pay. It was all so soft and smooth and sudden that I was not even
surprised.
"Do they play a lot of cards, Jeiks?"
"Yes, sir, a great deal."
"Isn't thirty-three and a third a bit steep?"
"I don't think so, sir."
"I'll give you ten per cent."
"No, sir, I couldn't do that." He was now examining the finger-nails of hi
s left hand, and patiently frowning.
"Then we'll make it fifteen. All right?"
"Thirty-three and a third, sir. It's very reasonable. After all, sir, seein
g that I don't even know if you are a good player, what I'm actually doing, not
meaning to be personal, is backing a horse and I've never even seen it run."
No doubt you think I should never have started bargaining with the butler
in the first place, and perhaps you are right. But being a liberal-minded pe
rson, I always try my best to be affable with the lower classes. Apart from t
hat, the more I thought about it, the more I had to admit to myself that it w

as an offer no sportsman had the right to reject.
"All right then, Jeiks. As you wish."
"Thank you, sir." He moved towards the door, walking slowly sideways lik
e a crab; but once more he hesitated, a hand on the knob. "If I may give a l
ittle advice, sir may I?"
"Yes?"
"It's simply that her ladyship tends to overbid her hand."
Now this was going too far. I was so startled I dropped my sock. After al
l, it's one thing to have a harmless little sporting arrangement with the but
ler about tipping, but when he begins conniving with you to take money away f
rom the hostess then it's time to call a halt.
"All right Jeiks. Now that'll do."
"No offence, sir, I hope. All I mean is you're bound to be playing again
st her ladyship. She always partners Major Haddock."
"Major Haddock? You mean Major Jack Haddock?"
"Yes, sir."
I noticed there was a trace of a sneer around the corner of Jelks's nose
when he spoke about this man. And it was worse with Lady Turton. Each time
he said 'her ladyship' he spoke the words with the outsides of his lips as t
hough he were nibbling a lemon, and there was a subtle, mocking inflection i
n his voice.
"You'll excuse me now, sir. Her ladyship will be down at seven o'clock.
So will Major Haddock and the others." He slipped out of the door leaving
behind him a certain dampness in the room and a faint smell of embrocation.
Shortly after seven, I found my way to the main drawing-room, and Lady T
urton, as beautiful as ever, got up to greet me.
"I wasn't even sure you were coming," she said in that peculiar lilting v
oice. "What's your name again?"
"I'm afraid I took you at your word, Lady Turton. I hope it's all right."
"Why not?" she said. "There's forty-seven bedrooms in the house. This
is my husband." A small man came around the back of her and said, "You kno
w, I'm so glad you were able to come." He had a lovely warm smile and when
he took my hand I felt instantly a touch of friendship in his fingers.
"And Carmen La Rosa," Lady Turton said.
This was a powerfully built woman who looked as though she might have
something to do with horses. She nodded at me, and although my hand was
already half-way out she didn't give me hers, thus forcing me to convert
the movement into a noseblow.
"You have a cold?" she said. "I'm sorry."
I did not like this Miss Carmen La Rosa.
"And this is Jack Haddock."
I knew this man slightly. He was a director of companies (whatever that

may mean), and a well-known member of society. I had used his name a few t
imes in my column, but I had never liked him, and this I think was mainly b
ecause I have a deep suspicion of all people who carry their military title
s back with them into private life-especially majors and colonels. Standing
there in his dinner-jacket with his full-blooded animal face and black eye
brows and large white teeth, he looked so handsome there was almost somethi
ng indecent about it. He had a way of raising his upper lip when he smiled,
baring his teeth, and he was smiling now as he gave me a hairy brown hand.
"I hope you're going to say some nice things about us in your column."
"He better had," Lady Turton said, "or I'll say some nasty ones about him
on my front page."
I laughed, but all three of them, Lady Turton, Major Haddock, and Carme
n La Rosa had already turned away and were settling themselves back on the
sofa. Jelks gave me a drink, and Sir Basil drew me gently aside for a quiet
chat at the other end of the room. Every now and then Lady Turton would ca
ll her husband to fetch her something--another Martini, a cigarette, an ash
tray, a handkerchief--and he, half rising from his chair, would be forestal
led by the watchful Jelks who fetched it for him.
Clearly, Jeiks loved his master; and just as clearly he hated the wife. Ea
ch time he did something for her he made a little sneer with his nose and drew
his lips together so they puckered like a turkey's bottom.
At dinner, our hostess sat her two friends, Haddock and La Rosa, on eit
her side of her. This unconventional arrangement left Sir Basil and me at t
he other end of the table where we were able to continue our pleasant talk
about painting and sculpture. Of course it was obvious to me by now that th
e Major was infatuated with her ladyship. And again, although I hate to say
it, it seemed as though the La Rosa woman was hunting the same bird.
All this foolishness appeared to delight the hostess. But it did not del
ight her husband. I could see that he was conscious of the little scene all
the time we were talking; and often his mind would wander from our subject a
nd he would stop short in mid-sentence, his eyes travelling down to the othe
r end of the table to settle pathetically for a moment on that lovely head w
ith the black hair and the curiously flaring nostrils. He must have noticed
then how exhilarated she was, how the hand that gestured as she spoke rested
every now and again on the Major's arm, and how the other woman, the one wh
o perhaps had something to do with horses, kept saying, "Nata-li-a? Now Nata
-li-a, listen to me!"
"Tomorrow," I said, "you must take me round and show me the sculptures
you've put up in the garden."
"Of course," he said, "with pleasure." He glanced again at the wife, an
d his eyes had a sort of supplicating look that was piteous beyond words. H
e was so mild and passive a man in every way that even now I could see ther

e was no anger in him, no danger, no chance of an explosion.
After dinner I was ordered straight to the card table to partner Miss Ca
rmen La Rosa against Major Haddock and Lady Turton. Sir Basil sat quietly on
the sofa with a book.
There was nothing unusual about the game itself; it was routine and ra
ther dull. But Jeiks was a nuisance. All evening he prowled around us, emp
tying ashtrays and asking about drinks and peering at our hands. He was ob
viously short-sighted and I doubt whether he saw much of what was going on
because as you may or may not know, here in England no butler has ever be
en permitted to wear spectacles nor for that matter, a moustache. This is
the golden, unbreakable rule and a very sensible one it is too, although I
'm not quite sure what lies behind it. I presume that a moustache would ma
ke him look too much like a gentleman, and spectacles too much like an Ame
rican, and where would we be then I should like to know? In any event Jelk
s was a nuisance all evening; and so was Lady Turton who was constantly ca
lled to the phone on newspaper business.
At eleven o'clock she looked up from her cards and said, "Basil, it's time
you went to bed."
"Yes, my dear, perhaps it is." He closed the book, got up, and stood fo
r a minute watching the play. "Are you having a good game?" he asked.
The others didn't answer him so I said, "It's a nice game."
"I'm so glad. And Jeiks will look after you and get anything you want."
"Jelks can go to bed too," the wife said.
I could hear Major Haddock breathing through his nose beside me, and the
soft drop of the cards one by one on to the table, and then the sound of Jeik
s's feet shuffling over the carpet towards us.
"You wouldn't prefer me to stay, m'lady?"
"No. Go to bed. You too, Basil."
"Yes, my dear. Good night. Good night all."
Jeiks opened the door for him, and he went slowly out followed by the but
ler.
As soon as the next rubber was over, I said that I too wanted to go to bed.
"All right," Lady Turton said. "Good night."
I went up to my room, locked the door, took a pill, and went to sleep.
The next morning, Sunday, I got up and dressed around ten o'clock and
went down to the breakfast-room. Sir Basil was there before me, and Jeiks
was serving him with grilled kidneys and bacon and fried tomatoes. He was
delighted to see me and suggested that as soon as we had finished eating w
e should take a long walk around the grounds. I told him nothing would giv
e me more pleasure.
Half an hour later we started out, and you've no idea what a relief it w

as to get away from that house and into the open air. It was one of those wa
rm shining days that come occasionally in mid-winter after a night of heavy
rain, with a bright surprising sun and not a breath of wind. Bare trees seem
ed beautiful in the sunlight, water still dripping from the branches, and we
t places all around were sparkling with diamonds. The sky had small faint cl
ouds.
"What a lovely day!"
"Yes--isn't it a lovely day!"
We spoke hardly another word during the walk; it wasn't necessary. But
he took me everywhere and I saw it all--the huge chessmen and all the rest
of the topiary. The elaborate garden houses, the pools, the fountains, the
children's maze whose hedges were hornbeam and lime so that it was only goo
d in summer when the leaves were out, and the parterres, the rockeries, the
greenhouses with their vines and nectarine trees. And of course, the sculp
ture. Most of the contemporary European sculptors were there, in bronze, gr
anite, limestone, and wood; and although it was a pleasure to see them warm
ing and glowing in the sun, to me they still looked a trifle out of place i
n these vast formal surroundings.
"Shall we rest here now a little while?" Sir Basil said after we had wa
lked for more than half an hour. So we sat down on a white bench beside a w
ater-lily pond full of carp and goldfish, and lit cigarettes. We were some
way from the house, on a piece of ground that was raised above its surround
ings, and from where we sat the gardens were spread out below us like a dra
wing in one of those old books on garden architecture, with the hedges and
lawns and terraces and fountains making a pretty pattern of squares and rings.
"My father bought this place just before I was born," Sir Basil said. "I'v
e lived here ever since, and I know every inch of it. Each day I grow to love
it more."
"It must be wonderful in summer."
"Oh, but it is. You should come down and see it in May and June. Will y
ou promise to do that?"
"Of course," I said. "I'd love to come," and as I spoke I was watching t
he figure of a woman dressed in red moving among the flower-beds in the far
distance. I saw her cross over a wide expanse of lawn, and there was a lilt
in her walk, a little shadow attending her, and when she was over the lawn,
she turned left and went along one side of a high wall of clipped yew until
she came to another smaller lawn that was circular and had in its centre a p
iece of sculpture.
"This garden is younger than the house," Sir Basil said. "It was laid o
ut early in the eighteenth century by a Frenchman called Beaumont, the same
fellow who did Levens, in Westmorland. For at least a year he had two hund
red and fifty men working on it."

The woman in the red dress had been joined now by a man, and they were
standing face to face, about a yard apart, in the very centre of the whole
garden panorama, on this little circular patch of lawn, apparently conversi
ng. The man had some small black object in his hand.
"If you're interested I'll show you the bills that Beaumont put in to the
Duke while he was making it."
"I'd like very much to see them. They must be fascinating."
"He paid his labourers a shilling a day and they worked ten hours."
In the clear sunlight it was not difficult to follow the movements and g
estures of the two figures on the lawn. They had turned now towards the piec
e of sculpture, and were pointing at it in a sort of mocking way, apparently
laughing and making jokes about its shape. I recognized it as being one of
the Henry Moores, done in wood, a thin smooth object of singular beauty that
had two or three holes in it and a number of strange limbs protruding.
"When Beaumont planted the yew trees for the chess-men and the other t
hings, he knew they wouldn't amount to much for at least a hundred years.
We don't seem to possess that sort of patience in our planning these days,
do we? What do you think?"
"No," I said. "We don't."
The black object in the man's hand turned out to be a camera, and now h
e had stepped back and was taking pictures of the woman beside the Henry Mo
ore. She was striking a number of different poses, all of them, so far as I
could see, ludicrous and meant to be amusing. Once she put her arms around
one of the protruding wooden limbs and hugged it, and another time she cli
mbed up and sat side-saddle on the thing, holding imaginary reins in her ha
nds. A great wall of yew hid these two people from the house, and indeed fr
om all the rest of the garden except the little hill on which we sat. They
had every right to believe they were not overlooked, and even if they had h
appened to glance our way--which was into the sun--I doubt whether they wou
ld have noticed the two small motionless figures sitting on the bench besid
e the pond.
"You know, I love these yews." Sir Basil said. "The colour of them is so
wonderful in a garden because it rests the eye. And in the summer it breaks
up the areas of brilliance into little patches and makes them more comforta
ble to admire. Have you noticed the different shades of greens on the planes
and facets of each clipped tree?"
"It's lovely, isn't it."
The man now seemed to be explaining something to the woman, and pointin
g at the Henry Moore, and I could tell by the way they threw back their hea
ds that they were laughing again. The man continued to point, and then the
woman walked around the back of the wood carving, bent down and poked her h
ead through one of its holes. The thing was about the size, shall I say, of

a small horse, but thinner than that, and from where I sat I could see bot
h sides of it--to the left, the woman's body, to the right, her head protru
ding through. It was very much like one of those jokes at the seaside where
you put your head through a hole in a board and get photographed as a fat
lady. The man was photographing her now.
"There's another thing about yews," Sir Basil said. "In the early summe
r when the young shoots come out... " At that moment he paused and sat up s
traighter and leaned slightly forward, and I could sense his whole body sud
denly stiffening.
"Yes," I said, "when the young shoots come out?"
The man had taken the photograph, but the woman still had her head throu
gh the hole, and now I saw him put both hands (as well as the camera) behind
his back and advance towards her. Then he bent forward so his face was clos
e to hers, touching it, and he held it there while he gave her, I suppose, a
few kisses or something like that. In the stillness that followed, I fancie
d I heard a faint faraway tinkle of female laughter coming to us through the
sunlight across the garden.
"Shall we go back to the house?" I asked.
"Back to the house?"
"Yes, shall we go back and have a drink before lunch?"
"A drink? Yes, we'll have a drink." But he didn't move. He sat very still
, gone far away from me now, staring intently at the two figures. I also was
staring at them. I couldn't take my eyes away; I had to look. It was like see
ing a dangerous little ballet in miniature from a great distance, and you kne
w the dancers and the music but not the end of the story, not the choreograph
y, nor what they were going to do next, and you were fascinated, and you had
to look.
"Gaudier Brzeska," I said. "How great do you think he might've become i
f he hadn't died so young?"
"Who?"
"Gaudier Brzeska."
"Yes," he said. "Of course."
I noticed now that something queer was happening. The woman still had h
er head through the hole, but she was beginning to wriggle her body from si
de to side in a slow unusual manner, and the man was standing motionless, a
pace or so away watching her. He seemed suddenly uneasy the way he stood t
here, and I could tell by the drop of the head and by the stiff intent set
of the body that there was no laughter in him any more. For a while he rema
ined still, then I saw him place his camera on the ground and go forward to
the woman, taking her head in his hands; and all at once it was more like
a puppet show than a ballet, with tiny wooden figures performing tiny, jerk
y movements, crazy and unreal, on a faraway sunlit stage. We sat quietly to

gether on the white bench, and we watched while the tiny puppet man began t
o manipulate the woman's head with his hands. He was doing it gently, there
was no doubt about that, slowly and gently, stepping back every now and th
en to think about it some more, and several times crouching down to survey
the situation from another angle. Whenever he left her alone the woman woul
d start to wriggle her body, and the peculiar way she did it reminded me of
a dog that feels a collar round its neck for the first time.
"She's stuck," Sir Basil said.
And now the man was walking to the other side of the carving, the side
where the woman's body was, and he put out his hands and began trying to do
something with her neck. Then, as though suddenly exasperated, he gave the
neck two or three jerky pulls, and this time the sound of a woman's voice,
raised high in anger, or pain, or both, came back to us small and clear th
rough the sunlight.
Out of the corner of one eye I could see Sir Basil nodding his head quietl
y up and down. "I got my fist caught in a jar of boiled sweets once," he said,
"and I couldn't get it out."
The man retreated a few yards, and was standing with hands on hips, hea
d up, looking furious and sullen. The woman, from her uncomfortable positio
n, appeared to be talking to him, or rather shouting at him, and although t
he body itself was pretty firmly fixed and could only wriggle, the legs wer
e free and did a good deal of moving and stamping. "I broke the jar with a
hammer and told my mother I'd knocked it off the shelf by mistake." He seem
ed calmer now, not tense at all, although his voice was curiously flat. "I
suppose we'd better go down and see if we can help."
"Perhaps we should."
But still he didn't move. He took out a cigarette and lit it, putting the us
ed match carefully back in the box.
"I'm sorry," he said. "Will you have one?"
"Thanks, I think I will." He made a little ceremony of giving me the cig
arette and lighting it for me, and again he put the used match back in the b
ox. Then we got up and walked slowly down the grass slope.
We came upon them silently, through an archway in the yew hedge, and it
was naturally quite a surprise.
"What's the matter here?" Sir Basil asked. He spoke softly, with a danger
ous softness that I'm sure his wife had never heard before.
"She's gone and put her head through the hole and now she can't get it ou
t," Major Haddock said. "Just for a lark, you know."
"For a what?"
"Basil!" Lady Turton shouted, "Don't be such a damn fool! Do something,
can't you!" She may not have been able to move much, but she could still t
alk.

"Pretty obvious we're going to have to break up this lump of wood," the
Major said. There was a small smudge of red on his grey moustache, and thi
s, like the single extra touch of colour that ruins a perfect painting, man
aged somehow to destroy all his manly looks. It made him comic.
"You mean break the Henry Moore?"
"My dear sir, there is no other way of setting the lady free. God knows how
she managed to squeeze it in, but I know for a fact that she can't pull it out
. It's the ears get in the way."
"Oh dear," Sir Basil said. "What a terrible pity. My beautiful Henry Moor
e."
At this stage Lady Turton began abusing her husband in a most unpleasan
t manner, and there's no knowing how long it would have gone on had not Jei
ks suddenly appeared out of the shadows. He came sidling silently on to the
lawn and stationed himself at a respectful distance from Sir Basil, as tho
ugh awaiting instructions. His black clothes looked perfectly ridiculous in
the morning sunlight, and with his ancient pink-white face and white hands
he was like some small crabby animal that has lived all its life in a hole
under the ground.
"Is there anything I can do, Sir Basil?" He kept his voice level, but I di
dn't think his face was quite straight. When he looked at Lady Turton there wa
s a little exulting glimmer in his eyes.
"Yes Jelks, there is. Go back and get me a saw or something so I can cut
out this section of wood."
"Shall I call one of the men, Sir Basil? William is a good carpenter."
"No, I'll do it myself. Just get the tools and hurry."
While they were waiting for Jelks, I strolled away because I didn't wan
t to hear any more of the things that Lady Turton was saying to her husband
. But I was back in time to see the butler returning, followed now by the o
ther woman, Carmen La Rosa, who made a rush for the hostess.
"Nata-Ji-a! My dear Nata-li-a! What have they done to you?"
"Oh shut up," the hostess said. "And get out of the way, will you."
Sir Basil took up a position close to his lady's head, waiting for Jelks
. Jeiks advanced slowly, carrying a saw in one hand, an axe in the other, an
d he stopped maybe a yard away. Then he held out both implements in front of
him so his master could choose, and there was a brief moment--no more than
two or three seconds--of silence, and of waiting, and it just happened that
I was watching Jelks at this time. I saw the hand that was carrying the axe
come forward an extra fraction of an inch towards Sir Basil. It was so sligh
t a movement it was barely noticeable--a tiny pushing forward of the hand, s
low and secret, a little offer, a little coaxing offer that was accompanied
perhaps by an infinitesimal lift of the eyebrow.
I'm not sure whether Sir Basil saw it, but be hesitated, and again the h

and that held the axe came edging forward, and it was almost exactly like th
at card trick where the man says 'Take one, whichever one you want,' and you
always get the one he means you to have. Sir Basil got the axe. I saw him r
each out in a dreamy sort of way, accepting it from Jeiks, and then, the ins
tant he felt the handle in his grasp he seemed to realize what was required
of him and he sprang to life.
For me, after that, it was like the awful moment when you see a child ru
nning out into the road and a car is coming and all you can do is shut your
eyes tight and wait until the noise tells you it has happened. The moment of
waiting becomes a long lucid period of time with yellow and red spots danci
ng on a black field, and even if you open your eyes again and find that nobo
dy has been killed or hurt, it makes no difference because so far as you and
your stomach were concerned you saw it all.
I saw this one all right, every detail of it, and I didn't open my eyes again
until I heard Sir Basil's voice, even softer than usual, calling in gentle prote
st to the butler.
"Jeiks," he was saying, and I looked and saw him standing there as calm
as you please, still holding the axe. Lady Turton's head was there too, stil
l sticking through the hole, but her face had turned a terrible ashy grey, a
nd the mouth was opening and shutting making a kind of gurgling sound.
"Look here, Jeiks," Sir Basil was saying. "What on earth are you thinkin
g about. This thing's much too dangerous. Give me the saw." And as he exchan
ged implements I noticed for the first time two little warm roses of colour
appearing on his cheeks, and above them, all around the corners of his eyes,
the twinkling tiny wrinkles of a smile.

The Sound Machine
IT was a warm summer evening and Klausner walked quickly through the fron
t gate and around the side of the house and into the garden at the back.
He went on down the garden until he came to a wooden shed and he unlocked
the door, went inside and closed the door behind him.
The interior of the shed was an unpainted room. Against one wall, on the
left, there was a long wooden workbench, and on it, among a littering of wire
s and batteries and small sharp tools, there stood a black box about three fe
et long, the shape of a child's coffin.
Klausner moved across the room to the box. The top of the box was open,
and he bent down and began to poke and peer inside it among a mass of differ
ent-coloured wires and silver tubes. He picked up a piece of paper that lay
beside the box, studied it carefully, put it down, peered inside the box and

started running his fingers along the wires, tugging gently at them to test
the connections, glancing back at the paper, then into the box, then at the
paper again, checking each wire. He did this for perhaps an hour.
Then he put a hand around to the front of the box where there were three
dials, and he began to twiddle them, watching at the same time the movement
of the mechanism inside the box. All the while he kept speaking softly to h
imself, nodding his head, smiling sometimes, his hands always moving, the fi
ngers moving swiftly, deftly, inside the box, his mouth twisting into curiou
s shapes when a thing was delicate or difficult to do, saying, "Yes... Yes..
. And now this one... Yes... Yes. But is this right? Is it--where's my diagr
am?... Ah, yes... Of course... Yes, yes... That's right... And now... Good..
. Good... Yes Yes, yes, yes." His concentration was intense; his movements w
ere quick; there was an air of urgency about the way he worked, of breathles
sness, of strong suppressed excitement.
Suddenly he heard footsteps on the gravel path outside and he straightene
d and turned swiftly as the door opened and a tall man came in. It was Scott.
It was only Scott, the doctor.
"Well, well, well," the Doctor said. "So this is where you hide yourself in
the evenings."
"Hullo, Scott," Klausner said.
"I happened to be passing," the Doctor told him, "so I dropped in to se
e how you were. There was no one in the house, so I came on down here. How'
s that throat of yours been behaving?"
"It's all right. It's fine."
"Now I'm here I might as well have a look at it."
"Please don't trouble. I'm quite cured. I'm fine."
The Doctor began to feel the tension in the room. He looked at the blac
k box on the bench; then he looked at the man. "You've got your hat on)" he
said. "Oh, have I?" Klausner reached up, removed the hat and put it on the
bench.
The Doctor came up closer and bent down to look into the box. "What's t
his?" he said. "Making a radio?"
"No, just fooling around."
"It's got rather complicated looking innards."
"Yes." Klausner seemed tense and distracted.
"What is it?" the Doctor asked. "It's rather a frightening-looking thing, isn'
t it?"
"It's just an idea."
"Yes?"
"It has to do with sound, that's all."
"Good heavens, man! Don't you get enough of that sort of thing all day i
n your work?"

"I like sound."
"So it seems." The Doctor went to the door, turned, and said, "Well, I w
on't disturb you. Glad your throat's not worrying you any more." But he kept
standing there looking at the box, intrigued by the remarkable complexity o
f its inside, curious to know what this strange patient of his was up to. "W
hat's it really for?" he asked. "You've made me inquisitive."
Klausner looked down at the box, then at the Doctor, and he reached up a
nd began gently to scratch the lobe of his right ear. There was a pause. The
Doctor stood by the door, waiting, smiling.
"All right, I'll tell you, if you're interested." There was another pause,
and the Doctor could see that Klausner was having trouble about how to begin.
He was shifting from one foot to the other, tugging at the lobe of his ear,
looking at his feet, and then at last, slowly, he said. "Well, it's like this.
.. the theory is very simple really. The human ear... you know that it can't he
ar everything. There are sounds that are so low-pitched or so high-pitched that
it can't hear them."
"Yes," the Doctor said. "Yes."
"Well, speaking very roughly any note so high that it has more than fifte
en thousand. vibrations a second--we can't hear it. Dogs have better ears tha
n us. You know you can buy a whistle whose note is so high-pitched that you c
an't hear it at all. But a dog can hear it."
"Yes, I've seen one," the Doctor said.
"Of course you have. And up the scale, higher than the note of that whistle
, there is another note--a vibration if you like, but I prefer to think of it a
s a note. You can't hear that one either. And above that there is another and a
nother rising right up the scale for ever and ever and ever, an endless success
ion of notes an infinity of notes... there is a note--if only our ears could he
ar it--so high that it vibrates a million times a second... and another a milli
on times as high as that... and on and on, higher and higher, as far as numbers
go, which is... infinity... eternity... beyond the stars."
Klausner was becoming more animated every Moment. He was a frail man,
nervous and twitchy, with always moving hands. His large head inclined tow
ards his left shoulder as though his neck were not quite strong enough to
support it rigidly. His face was smooth and pale, almost white, and the pa
le-grey eyes that blinked and peered from behind a pair of steel spectacle
s were bewildered, unfocused, remote. He was a frail, nervous, twitchy lit
tle man, a moth of a man, dreamy and distracted; suddenly fluttering and a
nimated; and now the Doctor, looking at that strange pale face and those p
ale-grey eyes, felt that somehow there was about this little person a qual
ity of distance, of immense immeasurable distance, as though the mind were
far away from where the body was.
The Doctor waited for him to go on. Klausner sighed and clasped his hand

s tightly together. "I believe," he said, speaking more slowly now, "that th
ere is a whole world of sound about us all the time that we cannot hear. It
is possible that up there in those high-pitched inaudible regions there is a
new exciting music being made, with subtle harmonies and fierce grinding di
scords, a music so powerful that it would drive us mad if only our ears were
tuned to hear the sound of it. There may be anything... for all we know the
re may--Ó "Yes," the Doctor said. "But it's not very probable."
"Why not? Why not?" Klausner pointed to a fly sitting on a small roll of
copper wire on the workbench. "You see that fly? What sort of noise is that
fly making now? None--that one can hear. But for all we know the creature m
ay be whistling like mad on a very high note, or barking or croaking or sing
ing a song. It's got a mouth, hasn't it? It's got a throat?" The Doctor look
ed at the fly and he smiled. He was still standing by the door with his hand
s on the doorknob. "Well," he said. "So you're going to check up on that?"
,, Some time ago," Klausner said, "I made a simple instrument that pro
ved to me the existence of many odd inaudible sounds. Often I have sat and
watched the needle of my instrument recording the presence of sound vibra
tions in the air when I myself could hear nothing. And those are the sound
s I want to listen to. I want to know where they come from and who or what
is making them."
"And that machine on the table there," the Doctor said, "is that going to
allow you to hear these noises?"
"It may. Who knows? So far, I've had no luck. But I've made some changes
in it and tonight I'm ready for another trial. This machine," he said, touchi
ng it with his hands, "is designed to pick up sound vibrations that are too h
ighpitched for reception by the human ear, and to convert them to a scale of
audible tones. I tune it in, almost like a radio."
"How d'you mean?"
"It isn't complicated. Say I wish to listen to the squeak of a bat. That'
s a fairly high-pitched sound--about thirty thousand vibrations a second The
average human ear can't quite hear it. Now, if there were a bat flying around
this room and I tuned in to thirty thousand on my machine, I would hear the
squeaking of that bat very clearly. I would even hear the correct note F shar
p, or B flat, or whatever it might be--but merely at a much lower pitch. Don'
t you understand?"
The Doctor looked at the long, black coffinbox. "And you're going to try i
t tonight?"
"Yes."
"Well, I wish you luck." He glanced at his watch. "My goodness!" he sa
id. "I must fly. Good-bye, and thank you for telling me. I must call again
sometime and find out what happened." The Doctor went out and closed the
door behind him.

For a while longer, Klausner fussed about with the wires in the black bo
x; then he straightened up and in a soft excited whisper said, "Now we'll tr
y again... We'll take it out into the garden this time... and then perhaps p
erhaps... the reception will be better. Lift it up now... carefully... Oh, m
y God, it's heavy!" He carried the box to the door, found that he couldn't o
pen the door without putting it down, carried it back, put it on the bench,
opened the door, and then carried it with some difficulty into the garden. H
e placed the box carefully on a small wooden table that stood on the lawn. H
e returned to the shed and fetched a pair of earphones. He plugged the wire
connections from the earphones into the machine and put the earphones over h
is ears. The movements of his hands were quick and precise. He was excited,
and breathed loudly and quickly through his mouth. He kept on talking to him
self with little words of comfort and encouragement, as though he were afrai
d--afraid that the machine might not work and afraid also of what might happ
en if it did.
He stood there in the garden beside the wooden table, so pale, small, a
nd thin that he looked like an ancient, consumptive, bespectacled child. Th
e sun had gone down. There was no wind, no sound at all. From where he stoo
d, he could see over a low fence into the next garden, and there was a woma
n walking down the garden with a flower-basket on her arm. He watched her f
or a while without thinking about her at all. Then he turned to the box on
the table and pressed a switch on its front. He put his left hand on the vo
lume control and his right hand on the knob that moved a needle across a la
rge central dial, like the wavelength dial of a radio. The dial was marked
with many numbers, in a series of bands, starting at 15,000 and going on up
to 1,000,000.
And now he was bending forward over the machine. His head was cocked to
one side in a tense, listening attitude. His right hand was beginning to t
urn the knob. The needle was travelling slowly across the dial, so slowly h
e could hardly see it move, and in the earphones he could hear a faint, spa
smodic crackling.
Behind this crackling sound he could hear a distant humming tone which w
as the noise of the machine itself, but that was all. As he listened, he bec
ame conscious of a curious sensation, a feeling that his ears were stretchin
g out away from his head, that each ear was connected to his head by a thin
stiff wire, like a tentacle, and that the wires were lengthening, that the e
ars were going up and up towards a secret and forbidden territory, a dangero
us ultrasonic region where ears had never been before and had no right to be.
The little needle crept slowly across the dial, and suddenly he heard a
shriek, a frightful piercing shriek, and he jumped and dropped his hands, ca
tching hold of the edge of the table. He stared around him as if expecting t
o see the person who had shrieked. There was no one in sight except the woma

n in the garden next door, and it was certainly not she. She was bending dow
n, cutting yellow roses and putting them in her basket.
Again it came--a throatless, inhuman shriek, sharp and short, very clear
and cold. The note itself possessed a minor, metallic quality that he had n
ever heard before. Klausner looked around him, searching instinctively for t
he source of the noise. The woman next door was the only living thing in sig
ht. He saw her reach down; take a rose stem in the fingers of one hand and s
nip the stem with a pair of scissors. Again he heard the scream.
It came at the exact moment when the rose stem was cut.
At this point, the woman straightened up, put the scissors in the basket w
ith the roses and turned to walk away.
"Mrs Saunders!" Klausner shouted, his voice shrill with excitement. "Oh
, Mrs Saunders!"
And looking round, the woman saw her neighbour standing on his lawn--a
fantastic, arm-waving little person with a pair of earphones on his head--c
alling to her in a voice so high and loud that she became alarmed.
"Cut another one! Please cut another one quickly!"
She stood still, staring at him. "Why, Mr Klausner," she said. "What's the
matter?"
"Please do as I ask," he said. "Cut just one more rose!"
Mrs Saunders had always believed her neighbour to be a rather peculiar
person; now it seemed that he had gone completely crazy. She wondered wheth
er she should run into the house and fetch her husband. No, she thought. No
, he's harmless. I'll just humour him. "Certainly, Mr Klausner, if you like
," she said. She took her scissors from the basket, bent down and snipped a
nother rose.
Again Klausner heard that frightful, throatless shriek in the earphones;
again it came at the exact moment the rose stem was cut. He took off the ea
rphones and ran to the fence that separated the two gardens. "All right," he
said. "That's enough. No more. Please, no more."
The woman stood there, a yellow rose in one hand, clippers in the other,
looking at him.
"I'm going to tell you something, Mrs Saunders," he said, "something tha
t you won't believe." He put his hands on top of the fence and peered at her
intently through his thick spectacles. "You have, this evening, cut a baske
tful of roses. You have with a sharp pair of scissors cut through the stems
of living things, and each rose that you cut screamed in the most terrible w
ay. Did you know that, Mrs Saunders?"
"No," she said. "I certainly didn't know that."
"It happens to be true," he said. He was breathing rather rapidly, but h
e was trying to control his excitement. "I heard them shrieking. Each time y
ou cut one, I heard the cry of pain. A very high-pitched sound, approximatel

y one hundred and thirty-two thousand vibrations a second. You couldn't poss
ibly have heard it yourself. But I heard it."
"Did you really, Mr Klausner?" She decided she would make a dash for th
e house in about five seconds.
"You might say," he went on, "that a rose bush has no nervous system to
feel with, no throat to cry with. You'd be right. It hasn't. Not like ours
, anyway. But how do you know, Mrs Saunders"--and here he leaned far over t
he fence and spoke in a fierce whisper "how do you know that a rose bush do
esn't feel as much pain when someone cuts its stem in two as you would feel
if someone cut your wrist off with a garden shears? How do you know that?
It's alive, isn't it?"
"Yes, Mr Klausner. Oh, yes and good night." Quickly she turned and ran
up the garden to her house. Klausner went back to the table. He put on th
e earphones and stood for a while listening. He could still hear the faint
crackling sound and the humming noise of the machine, but nothing more. H
e bent down and took hold of a small white daisy growing on the lawn. He t
ook it between thumb and forefinger and slowly pulled it upward and sidewa
ys until the stem broke.
From the moment that he started pulling to the moment when the stem brok
e, he heard--he distinctly heard in the earphones--a faint high-pitched cry,
curiously inanimate. He took another daisy and did it again. Once more he h
eard the cry, but he wasn't sure now that it expressed pain. No, it wasn't p
ain; it was surprise. Or was it? It didn't really express any of the feeling
s or emotions known to a human being. It was just a cry, a neutral, stony cr
y--a single emotionless note, expressing nothing. It had been the same with
the roses. He had been wrong in calling it a cry of pain. A flower probably
didn't feel pain. It felt something else which we didn't know about--somethi
ng called tom or spun or plinuckment, or anything you like.
He stood up and removed the earphones. It was getting dark and he could
see pricks of light shining in the windows of the houses all around him. C
arefully he picked up the black box from the table, carried it into the she
d and put it on the workbench. Then he went out, locked the door behind him
and walked up to the house.
The next morning Klausner was up as soon as it was light. He dressed and
went straight to the shed. He picked up the machine and carried it outside,
clasping it to his chest with both hands, walking unsteadily under its weig
ht. He went past the house, out through the front gate, and across the road
to the park. There he paused and looked around him; then he went on until he
came to a large tree, a beech tree, and he placed the machine on the ground
close to the trunk of the tree. Quickly he went back to the house and got a
n axe from the coal cellar and carried it across the road into the park. He
put the axe on the ground beside the tree. Then he looked around him again,

peering nervously through his thick glasses in every direction. There was no
one about. It was six in the morning.
He put the earphones on his head and switched on the machine. He listene
d for a moment to the faint familiar humming sound; then he picked up the ax
e, took a stance with his legs wide apart and swung the axe as hard as he co
uld at the base of the tree trunk. The blade cut deep into the wood and stuc
k there, and at the instant of impact he heard a most extraordinary noise in
the earphones. It was a new noise, unlike any he had heard before--a harsh,
noteless, enormous noise, a growling, lowpitched, screaming sound, not quic
k and short like the noise of the roses, but drawn out like a sob lasting fo
r fully a minute, loudest at the moment when the axe struck, fading graduall
y fainter and fainter until it was gone.
Klausner stared in horror at the place where the blade of the axe had sunk
into the woodflesb of the tree; then gently he took the axe handle, worked th
e blade loose and threw the thing to the ground. With his fingers he touched t
he gash that the axe had made in the wood, touching the edges of the gash, try
ing to press them together to close the wound, and he kept saying, "Tree... oh
, tree... I am sorry I am sorry... but it will heal... it will heal fine.
For a while he stood there with his hands upon the trunk of the great tre
e; then suddenly he turned away and hurried off out of the park, across the r
oad, through the front gate and back into his house. He went to the telephone
, consulted the book, dialled a number and waited. He held the receiver tight
ly in his left hand and tapped the table impatiently with his right. He heard
the telephone buzzing at the other end, and then the click of a lifted recei
ver and a man's voice, a sleepy voice, saying: "Hullo. Yes."
"Dr Scott?" he said.
"Yes. Speaking."
"Dr Scott. You must come at once--quickly, please."
"Who is it speaking?"
"Klausner here, and you remember what I told you last night about my ex
perience with sound, and how I hoped I might-- "Yes, yes, of course, but wh
at's the matter? Are you ill?"
"No, I'm not ill, but-- "It's half-past six in the morning," the Doctor said,
"and you call me but you are not ill."
"Please come. Come quickly. I want someone to hear it. It's driving me
mad! I can't believe it... The Doctor heard the frantic, almost hysterical
note in the man's voice, the same note he was used to hearing in the voices
of people who called up and said, "There's been an accident. Come quickly.
" He said slowly. "You really want me to get out of bed and come over now?"
"Yes, now. At once, please."
"All right, then--I'll come."
Klausner sat down beside the telephone and waited. He tried to remember

what the shriek of the tree had sounded like, but he couldn't. He could re
member only that it had been enormous and frightful and that it had made hi
m feel sick with horror. He tried to imagine what sort of noise a human wou
ld make if he had to stand anchored to the ground while someone deliberatel
y swung a small sharp thing at his leg so that the blade cut in deep and we
dged itself in the cut. Same sort of noise perhaps? No. Quite different. Th
e noise of the tree was worse than any known human noise because of that fr
ightening, toneless, throatless quality. He began to wonder about other liv
ing things, and he thought immediately of a field of wheat standing up stra
ight and yellow and alive, with the mower going through it, cutting the ste
ms, five hundred stems a second, every second. Oh, my God, what would that
noise be like? Five hundred wheat plants screaming together and every secon
d another five hundred being cut and screaming and no, he thought, I do not
want to go to a wheat field with my machine. I would never eat bread after
that. But what about potatoes and cabbages and carrots and onions? And wha
t about apples? Ah, no. Apples are all right. They fall off naturally when
they are ripe. Apples are all right if you let them fall off instead of tea
ring them from the tree branch. But not vegetables. Not a potato for exampl
e. A potato would surely shriek; so would a carrot and an onion and a cabbage.
He heard the click of the front-gate latch and he jumped up and went out
and saw the tall doctor coming down the path, little black bag in hand.
"Well," the Doctor said. "Well, what's all the trouble?"
"Come with me, Doctor, I want you to hear it. I called you because you're
the only one I've told. It's over the road in the park. Will you come now?"
The Doctor looked at him. He seemed calmer now. There was no sign of
madness or hysteria; he was merely disturbed and excited.
They went across the road into the park and Klausner led the way to the
great beech tree at the foot of which stood the long black coffin-box of the
machine--and the axe.
"Why did you bring it out here?" the Doctor asked.
"I wanted a tree. There aren't any big trees in the garden."
"And why the axe?"
"You'll see in a moment. But now please put on these earphones and listen
. Listen carefully and tell me afterwards precisely what you hear. I want to
make quite sure...
The Doctor smiled and took the earphones and put them over his ears.
Klausner bent down and flicked the switch on the panel of the machine;
then he picked up the axe and took his stance with his legs apart, ready to
swing. For a moment he paused.
"Can you hear anything?" he said to the Doctor.
"Can I what?"
"Can you hear anything?"

"Just a humming noise."
Klausner stood there with the axe in his hands trying to bring himself t
o swing, but the thought of the noise that the tree would make made him paus
e again.
"What are you waiting for?" the Doctor asked.
"Nothing," Klausner answered, and then lifted the axe and swung it at t
he tree, and as he swung, he thought he felt, he could swear he felt a move
ment of the ground on which he stood. He felt a slight shifting of the eart
h beneath his feet as though the roots of the tree were moving underneath t
he soil, but it was too late to check the blow and the axe blade struck the
tree and wedged deep into the wood. At that moment, high overhead, there w
as the cracking sound of wood splintering and the swishing sound of leaves
brushing against other leaves and they both looked up and the Doctor cried,
"Watch out! Run, man! Quickly, run!"
The Doctor had ripped off the earphones and was running away fast, but K
lausner stood spellbound, staring up at the great branch, sixty feet long at
least, that was bending slowly downward, breaking and crackling and splinte
ring at its thickest point, where it joined the main trunk of the tree. The
branch came crashing down and Klausner leapt aside just in time. It fell upo
n the machine and smashed it into pieces.
"Great heavens!" shouted the Doctor as he came running back. "That was
a near one! J thought it had got you!"
Klausner was staring at the tree. His large head was leaning to one side
and upon his smooth white face there was a tense, horrified expression. Slo
wly he walked up to the tree and gently he prised the blade loose from the t
runk.
"Did you hear it?" he said, turning to the Doctor. His voice was barely aud
ible.
The Doctor was still out of breath from running and the excitement. "Hea
r what?"
"In the earphones. Did you hear anything when the axe struck?"
The Doctor began to rub the back of his neck. "Well," he said, "as a matte
r of fact... " He paused and frowned and bit his lower lip. "No, I'm not sure.
I couldn't be sure. I don't suppose I had the earphones on for more than a se
cond after the axe struck."
"Yes, yes, but what did you hear?"
"I don't know," the Doctor said. "I don't know what I heard. Probably the
noise of the branch breaking." He was speaking rapidly, rather irritably.
"What did it sound like?" Klausner leaned forward slightly, staring hard a
t the Doctor. Exactly what. did it sound like?"
"Oh hell!" the Doctor said, "I really don't know. I was more interested in g
etting out of the way. Let's leave it."

"Dr Scott, what-did-it-sound-like?"
"For God's sake, how could I tell, what with half the tree falling on me
and having to run for my life?" The Doctor certainly seemed nervous. Klausner
had sensed it now. He stood quite still, staring at the Doctor and for fully
half a minute he didn't speak. The Doctor moved his feet, shrugged his shoul
ders and half turned to go. "Well," he said, "we'd better get back."
"Look," said the little man, and now his smooth white face became suddenl
y suffused with colour. "Look," he said, "you stitch this up." He pointed to
the last gash that the axe had made in the tree trunk. "You stitch this up qu
ickly."
"Don't be silly," the Doctor said.
"You do as I say. Stitch it up." Klausner was gripping the axe handle and
he spoke softly, in a curious, almost a threatening tone.
"Don't be silly," the Doctor said. "I can't stitch through wood. Come on. L
et's get back."
"So you can't stitch through wood?"
"No, of course not."
"Have you got any iodine in your bag?"
"What if I have?"
"Then paint the cut with iodine. It'll sting, but that can't be helped."
"Now look," the Doctor said, and again he turned as if to go. "Let's not be
ridiculous. Let's get back to the house and then...
"Paint-the-cut-with-iodine."
The Doctor hesitated. He saw Klausner's hands tightening on the handle of
the axe. He decided that his only alternative was to run away, fast, and he
certainly wasn't going to do that.
"All right," he said. "I'll paint it with iodine."
He got his black bag which was lying on the grass about ten yards away,
opened it and took out a bottle of iodine and some cotton wool. He went up
to the tree trunk, uncorked the bottle, tipped some of the iodine on to th
e cotton wool, bent down and began to dab it into the cut. He kept one eye
on Klausner who was standing motionless with the axe in his hands, watching
him.
"Make sure you get it right in."
"Yes," the Doctor said.
"Now do the other one--the one just above it!"
The Doctor did as he was told.
"There you are," he said. "It's done."
He straightened up and surveyed his work in a very serious manner. "That
should do nicely."
Klausner came closer and gravely examined the two wounds.
"Yes," he said, nodding his huge head slowly up and down. "Yes, that w

ill do nicely." He stepped back a pace. "You'll come and look at them agai
n tomorrow?"
"Oh, yes," the Doctor said. "Of course." And put some more iodine on?" I
f necessary, yes.
"Thank you, Doctor," Klausner said, and he nodded his head again and he
dropped the axe and all at once he smiled, a wild, excited smile, and quic
kly the Doctor went over to him and gently he took him by the arm and he sa
id, "Come on, we must go now," and suddenly they were walking away, the two
of them, walking silently, rather hurriedly across the park, over the road
, back to the house.

Nunc Dimittis
IT is nearly midnight, and I can see that if I don't make a start with writin
g this story now, I never shall. All evening I have been sitting here trying
to force myself to begin, but the more I have thought about it, the more appa
lled and ashamed and distressed I have become by the whole thing.
My idea--and I believe it was a good one--was to try, by a process of co
nfession and analysis, to discover a reason or at any rate some justificatio
n for my outrageous behaviour towards Janet de Pelagia. I wanted, essentiall
y, to address myself to an imaginary and sympathetic listener, a kind of myt
hical you, someone gentle and understanding to whom I might tell unashamedly
every detail of this unfortunate episode. I can only hope that I am not too
upset to make a go of it.
If I am to be quite honest with myself, I suppose I shall have to admit
that what is disturbing me most is not so much the sense of my own shame, or
even the hurt that I have inflicted upon poor Janet; it is the knowledge th
at I have made a monstrous fool of myself and that all my friends--if I can
still call them that--all those warm and lovable people who used to come so
often to my house, must flow be regarding me as nothing but a vicious, venge
ful old man. Yes, that surely hurts. When I say to you that my friends were
my whole life--everything, absolutely everything in it--then perhaps you wil
l begin to understand.
Will you? I doubt it unless I digress for a minute to tell you roughly the s
ort of person I am.
Well--let me see. Now that I come to think of it, I suppose I am, after
all, a type; a rare one, mark you, but nevertheless a quite definite type-the wealthy, leisurely, middle-aged man of culture, adored (I choose the w
ord carefully) by his many friends for his charm, his money, his air of sch
olarship, his generosity, and I sincerely hope for himself also. You will f

ind him (this type) only in the big capitals London, Paris, New York; of th
at I am certain. The money he has was earned by his dead father whose memor
y he is inclined to despise. This is not his fault, for there is something
in his make-up that compels him secretly to look down upon all people who n
ever had the wit to learn the difference between Rockingham and Spode, Wate
rford and Venetian, Sheraton and Chippendale, Monet and Manet, or even Pomm
ard and Montrachet.
He is, therefore, a connoisseur, possessing above all things an exquisit
e taste. His Constables, Boningtons, Lautrecs, Redons, Vuillards, Matthew Sm
iths are as fine as anything in the Tate; and because they are so fabulous a
nd beautiful they create an atmosphere of suspense around him in the home, s
omething tantalizing, breathtaking, faintly frightening--frightening to thin
k that he has the power and the right, if he feels inclined, to slash, tear,
plunge his fist through a superb Dedham Vale, a Mont Saint-Victoire, an Ari
es cornfield, a Tahiti maiden, a portrait of Madame Cezanne. And from the wa
lls on which these wonders hang there issues a little golden glow of splendo
ur, a subtle emanation of grandeur in which he lives and moves and entertain
s with a sly nonchalance that is not entirely unpractised.
He is invariably a bachelor, yet he never appears to get entangled with
the women who surround him, who love him so dearly. It is just possible--and
this you may or may not have noticed--that there is a frustration, a discon
tent, a regret somewhere inside him. Even a slight aberration.
I don't think I need say any more. I have been very frank. You should
know me well enough by now to judge me fairly--and dare I hope it?--to sym
pathize with me when you hear my story. You may even decide that much of t
he blame for what has happened should be placed, not upon me, but upon a l
ady called Gladys Ponsonby. After all, she was the one who started it. Had
I not escorted Gladys Ponsonby back to her house that night nearly six mo
nths ago, and had she not spoken so freely to me about certain people, and
certain things, then this tragic business could never have taken place.
It was last December, if I remember rightly, and I had been dining with
the Ashendens in that lovely house of theirs that overlooks the southern fri
nge of Regent's park. There were a fair number of people there, but Gladys P
onsonby was the only one beside myself who had come alone. So when it was ti
me for us to leave, I naturally offered to see her safely back to her house.
She accepted and we left together in my car; but unfortunately, when we arr
ived at her place she insisted that I come in and have 'one for the road', a
s she put it. I didn't wish to seem stuffy, so I told the chauffeur to wait
and followed her in.
Gladys Ponsonby is an unusually short woman, certainly not more than fou
r feet nine or ten, maybe even less than that--one of those tiny persons who
gives me, when I am beside her, the comical, rather wobbly feeling that I a

m standing on a chair. She is a widow, a few years younger than me--maybe fi
fty-three or four, and it is possible that thirty years ago she was quite a
fetching little thing. But now the face is loose and puckered with nothing d
istinctive about it whatsoever. The individual features, the eyes, the nose,
the mouth, the chin, are buried in the folds of fat around the puckered lit
tle face and one does not notice them. Except perhaps the mouth, which remin
ds me I cannot help it--of a salmon.
In the living-room, as she gave me my brandy, I noticed that her hand was
a trifle unsteady. The lady is tired, I told myself, so I mustn't stay long.
We sat down together on the sofa and for a while discussed the Ashendens' pa
rty and the people who were there. Finally I got up to go.
"Sit down, Lionel," she said. "Have another brandy."
"No, really, I must go."
"Sit down and don't be so stuffy. I'm having another one, and the least y
ou can do is keep me company while I drink it."
I watched her as she walked over to the sideboard, this tiny woman, faint
ly swaying, holding her glass out in front of her with both hands as though i
t were an offering; and the sight of her walking like that, so incredibly sho
rt and squat and stiff, suddenly gave me the ludicrous notion that she had no
legs at all above the knees.
"Lionel, what are you chuckling about?" She half turned to look at me as
she poured the drink, and some of it slopped over the side of the glass.
"Nothing, my dear. Nothing at all."
"Well, stop it, and tell me what you think of my new portrait." She indi
cated a large canvas hanging over the fireplace that I had been trying to av
oid with my eye ever since I entered the room. It was a hideous thing, paint
ed, as I well knew, by a man who was now all the rage in London, a very medi
ocre painter called John Royden. It was a full-length portrait of Gladys, La
dy Ponsonby, painted with a certain technical cunning that made her out to b
e a tall and quite alluring creature.
"Charming," I said.
"Isn't it, though! I'm so glad you like it."
"Quite charming."
"I think John Royden is a genius. Don't you think he's a genius, Lionel?"
"Well--that might be going a bit far."
"You mean it's a little early to say for sure?"
"Exactly."
"But listen, Lionel and I think this will surprise you. John Royden is so
sought after now that he won't even consider painting anyone for less than a
thousand guineas!"
"Really?"
"Oh, yes! And everyone's queueing up, simply queueing up to get themse

lves done."
"Most interesting."
"Now take your Mr Cezanne or whatever his name is. I'll bet he never got
that sort of money in his lifetime."
"Never."
"And you say he was a genius?"
"Sort of yes."
"Then so is Royden," she said, settling herself again on the sofa. "The mo
ney proves it."
She sat silent for a while, sipping her brandy, and I couldn't help noti
cing how the unsteadiness of her hand was causing the rim of the glass to jo
g against her lower lip. She knew I was watching her, and without turning he
r head she swivelled her eyes and glanced at me cautiously out of the corner
s of them. "A penny for your thoughts?"
Now, if there is one phrase in the world I cannot abide, it is this. It give
s me an actual physical pain in the chest and I begin to cough.
"Come on, Lionel. A penny for them."
I shook my head, quite unable to answer. She turned away abruptly and p
laced the brandy glass on a small table to her left; and the manner in whic
h she did this seemed to suggest--I don't know why--that she felt rebuffed
and was now clearing the decks for action. I waited, rather uncomfortable i
n the silence that followed, and because I had no conversation left in me,
I made a great play about smoking my cigar, studying the ash intently and b
lowing the smoke up slowly towards the ceiling. But she made no move. There
was beginning to be something about this lady I did not much like, a misch
ievous brooding air that made me want to get up quickly and go away. When s
he looked around again, she was smiling at me slyly with those little burie
d eyes of hers, but the mouth--oh, just like a salmon's--was absolutely rigid.
"Lionel, I think I'll tell you a secret."
"Really, Gladys, I simply must get home."
"Don't be frightened, Lionel. I won't embarrass you. You look so frighten
ed all of a sudden."
"I'm not very good at secrets."
"I've been thinking," she said, "you're such a great expert on pictures,
this ought to interest you." She sat quite still except for her fingers which
were moving all the time. She kept them perpetually twisting and twisting ar
ound each other, and they were like a bunch of small white snakes wriggling i
n her lap.
"Don't you want to hear my secret, Lionel?"
"It isn't that, you know. It's just that it's so awfully late...
"This is probably the best-kept secret in London. A woman's secret. I s
uppose it's known to about let me see--about thirty or forty women altogeth

er. And not a single man. Except him, of course--John Royden."
I didn't wish to encourage her, so I said nothing.
"But first of all, promise--promise you won't tell a soul?"
"Dear me!"
"You promise, Lionel?"
"Yes, Gladys, all right, I promise."
"Good! Now listen." She reached for the brandy glass and settled back
comfortably in the far corner of the sofa. "I suppose you know John Royden
paints only women?"
"I didn't."
"And they're always full-length portraits, either standing or sitting--lik
e mine there. Now take a good look at it, Lionel. Do you see how beautifully t
he dress is painted?"
"Well... "Go over and look carefully, please."
I got up reluctantly and went over and examined the painting. To my surpris
e I noticed that the paint of the dress was laid on so heavily it was actually
raised out from the rest of the picture. It was a trick, quite effective in its
way, but neither difficult to do nor entirely original.
"You see?" she said. "It's thick, isn't it, where the dress is?"
"Yes."
"But there's a bit more to it than that, you know, Lionel. I think the be
st way is to describe what happened the very first time I went along for a si
tting." Oh, what a bore this woman is, I thought, and how can I get away?
"That was about a year ago, and I remember how excited I was to be going
into the studio of the great painter. I dressed myself up in a wonderful ne
w thing I'd just got from Norman Hartnell, and a special little red hat, and
off I went. Mr Royden met me at the door, and of course I was fascinated by
him at once. He had a small pointed beard and thrilling blue eyes, and he w
ore a black velvet jacket. The studio was huge, with red velvet sofas and ve
lvet chairs--he loves velvet--and velvet curtains and even a velvet carpet o
n the floor. He sat me down, gave me a drink and came straight to the point.
He told me about how he painted quite differently from other artists. In hi
s opinion, he said, there was only one method of attaining perfection when p
ainting a woman's body and I mustn't be shocked when I heard what it was.
"I don't think I'll be shocked, Mr Royden,' I told him.
"I'm sure you won't either,' he said. He had the most marvellous white te
eth and they sort of shone through his beard when he smiled. 'You see, it's l
ike this,' he went on. 'You examine any painting you like of a woman--I don't
care who it's by--and you'll see that although the dress may be well painted
, there is an effect of artificiality, of flatness about the whole thing, as
though the dress were draped over a log of wood. And you know why?'
"No, Mr Royden, I don't.'

"Because the painters themselves didn't really know what was underneath
!"
Gladys Ponsonby paused to take a few more sips of brandy. "Don't look so
startled, Lionel," she said to me. "There's nothing wrong about this. Keep qu
iet and let me finish. So then Mr Royden said, 'That's why I insist on painti
ng my subjects first of all in the nude.'
"Good Heavens, Mr Royden!' I exclaimed.
"If you object to that, I don't mind making a slight concession, Lady Ponso
nby,' he said. 'But I prefer it the other way.'
"Really, Mr Royden, I don't know.'
"And when I've done you like that,' he went on, 'we'll have to wait a few
weeks for the paint to dry. Then you come back and I paint on your underclot
hing. And when that's dry, I paint on the dress. You see, it's quite simple."
"The man's an absolute bounder!" I cried.
"No, Lionel, no! You're quite wrong. If only you could have heard him, s
o charming about it all, so genuine and sincere. Anyone could see he really
felt what he was saying."
"I tell you, Gladys, the man's a bounder!"
"Don't be so silly, Lionel. And anyway, let me finish. The first thing I
told him was that my husband (who was alive then) would never agree.
"Your husband need never know,' he answered. 'Why trouble him. No one
knows my secret except the women I've painted.'
"And when I protested a bit more, I remember he said, 'My dear Lady Po
nsonby, there's nothing immoral about this. Art is only immoral when pract
ised by amateurs. It's the same with medicine. You wouldn't refuse to undr
ess before your doctor, would you?'
"I told him I would if I'd gone to him for ear-ache. That made him laug
h. But he kept on at me about it and I must say he was very convincing, so
after a while I gave in and that was that. So now, Lionel, my sweet, you kn
ow the secret." She got up and went over to fetch herself some more brandy.
"Gladys, is this really true?"
"Of course it's true."
"You mean to say that's the way he paints all his subjects?"
"Yes. And the joke is the husbands never know anything about it. All they
see is a nice fully clothed portrait of their wives. Of course, there's nothin
g wrong with being painted in the nude; artists do it all the time. But our si
lly husbands have a way of objecting to that sort of thing."
"By gad, the fellow's got a nerve!"
"I think he's a genius."
"I'll bet he got the idea from Goya."
"Nonsense, Lionel."
"Of course he did. But listen, Gladys, I want you to tell me something.

Did you by any chance know about this... this peculiar technique of Royden's
before you went to him?"
When I asked the question she was in the act of pouring the brandy, and
she hesitated and turned her head to look at me, a little silky smile moving
the corners of her mouth. "Damn you, Lionel," she said. "You're far too cle
ver. You never let me get away with a single thing."
"So you knew?"
"Of course. Hermione Girdlestone told me."
"Exactly as I thought!"
"There's still nothing wrong."
"Nothing." I said. "Absolutely nothing." I could see it all quite clearl
y now. This Royden was indeed a bounder, practising as neat a piece of psych
ological trickery as ever I'd seen. The man knew only too well that there wa
s a whole set of wealthy indolent women in the city who got up at noon and s
pent the rest of the day trying to relieve their boredom with bridge and can
asta and shopping until the cocktail hour came along. All they craved was a
little excitement, something out of the ordinary, and the more expensive the
better. Why the news of an entertainment like this would spread through
their ranks like smallpox. I could just see the great plump Hermione Girdles
tone leaning over the canasta table and telling them about it 'But my dear,
it's simp-ly fascinating... I can't tell you how intriguing it is... much mo
re fun than going to your doctor... "You won't tell anyone, Lionel, will you
? You promised."
"No, of course not. But now I must go, Gladys, I really must."
"Don't be so silly. I'm just beginning to enjoy myself. Stay till I've finish
ed this drink, anyway."
I sat patiently on the sofa while she went on with her interminable bran
dy sipping. The little buried eyes were still watching me out of their corne
rs in that mischievous, canny way, and I had a strong feeling that the woman
was now hatching out some further unpleasantness or scandal. There was the
look of serpents in those eyes and a queer curl around the mouth; and in the
air--although maybe I only imagined it--the faint smell of danger.
Then suddenly, so suddenly that I jumped, she said, "Lionel, what's this
I hear about you and Janet de Pelagia?"
"Now. Gladys, please..
"Lionel, you're blushing!"
"Nonsense."
"Don't tell me the old bachelor has really taken a tumble at last?"
"Gladys, this is too absurd." I began making movements to go, but she
put a hand on my knee and stopped me.
"Don't you know by now, Lionel, that there are no secrets?"
"Janet is a fine girl."

"You can hardly call her a girl." Gladys Ponsonby paused, staring down
into the large brandy glass that she held cupped in both hands. "But of cou
rse, I agree with you, Lionel, she's a wonderful person in every way. Excep
t," and now she spoke very slowly, "except that she does say some rather pe
culiar things occasionally."
"What sort of things?"
"Just things, you know--things about people. About you."
"What did she say about me?"
"Nothing at all, Lionel. It wouldn't interest you."
"What did she say about me?"
"It's not even worth repeating, honestly it isn't. It's only that it struck me
as being rather odd at the time."
"Gladys--what did she say?" While I waited for her to answer, I could fe
el the sweat breaking out all over my body.
"Well now, let me see. Of course, she was only joking or I couldn't dream
of telling you, but I suppose she did say how it was all a wee bit of a bore."
"What was?"
"Sort of going out to dinner with you nearly every night that kind of thing
."
"She said it was a bore?"
"Yes." Gladys Ponsonby drained the brandy glass with one last big gulp, a
nd sat up straight. "If you really want to know, she said it was a crashing b
ore. And then..
"What did she say then?"
"Now look, Lionel--there's no need to get excited. I'm only telling you t
his for your own good."
"Then please hurry up and tell it."
"It's just that I happened to be playing canasta with Janet this afternoon
and I asked her if she was free to dine with me tomorrow. She said no, she wa
sn't."
"Go on."
"Well--actually what she said was 'I'm dining with that crashing old bor
e Lionel Lampson."
"Janet said that?"
"Yes, Lionel dear."
"What else?"
"Now, that's enough. I don't think I should tell the rest."
"Finish it, please!"
"Why, Lionel, don't keep shouting at me like that. Of course I'll tell you i
f you insist. As a matter of fact, I wouldn't consider myself a true friend if I
didn't. Don't you think it's the sign of true friendship when two people like u

s... "
"Gladys! Please hurry."
"Good heavens, you must give me time to think. Let me see now--so far a
s I can remember, what she actually said was this..
-and Gladys Ponsonby, sitting upright on the sofa with her feet not quit
e touching the floor, her eyes away from me now, looking at the wall, began
cleverly to mimic the deep tone of that voice I knew so well--"Such a bore,
my dear, because with Lionel one can always tell exactly what will happen ri
ght from beginning to end. For dinner we'll go to the Savoy Grill--it's alwa
ys the Savoy Grill--and for two hours I'll have to listen to the pompous old
... I mean I'll have to listen to him droning away about pictures and porcel
ain--always pictures and porcelain. Then in the taxi going home he'll reach
out for my hand, and he'll lean closer, and I'll get a whiff of stale cigar
smoke and brandy, and he'll start burbling about how he wished--oh, how he w
ished he was just twenty years younger. And I will say, 'Could you open a wi
ndow, do you mind?' And when we arrive at my house I'll tell him to keep the
taxi, but he'll pretend he hasn't heard and pay it off quickly. And then at
the front door, while I fish for my key, he'll stand beside me with a sort
of silly spaniel look in his eyes, and I'll slowly put the key in the lock,
and slowly turn it, and then--very quickly, before he has time to move--I'll
say good night and skip inside and shut the door behind me... ' Why, Lionel
! What's the matter, dear? You look positively ill.
At that point, mercifully, I must have swooned clear away. I can rememb
er practically nothing of the rest of that terrible night except for a vagu
e and disturbing suspicion that when I regained consciousness I broke down
completely and permitted Gladys Ponsonby to comfort me in a variety of diff
erent ways. Later, I believe I walked out of the house and was driven home,
but I remained more or less unconscious of everything around me until I wo
ke up in my bed the next morning.
I awoke feeling weak and shaken. I lay still with my eyes closed, tryi
ng to piece together the events of the night before Gladys Ponsonby's livi
ng-room, Gladys on the sofa sipping brandy, the little puckered face, the
mouth that was like a salmon's mouth, the things she had said What was it
she had said? Ah, yes. About me. My God, yes! About Janet and me! Those ou
trageous, unbelievable remarks! Could Janet really have made them? Could she?
I can remember with what terrifying swiftness my hatred of Janet de Pelag
ia now began to grow. It all happened in a few minutes--a sudden, violent wel
ling up of a hatred that filled me till I thought I was going to burst. I tri
ed to dismiss it, but it was on me like a fever, and in no time at all I was
hunting around, as would some filthy gangster, for a method of revenge.
A curious way to behave, you may say, for a man such as me; to which I
would answer no, not really, if you consider the circumstances. To my mind,

this was the sort of thing that could drive a man to murder. As a matter o
f fact, had it not been for a small sadistic streak that caused me to seek
a more subtle and painful punishment for my victim, I might well have becom
e a murderer myself. But mere killing, I decided, was too good for this wom
an, and far too crude for my own taste. So I began looking for a superior a
lternative.
I am not normally a scheming person; I consider it an odious business a
nd have had no practice in it whatsoever. But fury and hate can concentrate
a man's mind to an astonishing degree, and in no time at all a plot was fo
rming and unfolding in my head--a plot so superior and exciting that I bega
n to be quite carried away at the idea of it. By the time I had filled in t
he details and overcome one or two minor objections, my brooding vengeful m
ood had changed to one of extreme elation, and I remember how I started bou
ncing up and down absurdly on my bed and clapping my hands. The next thing
I knew I had the telephone directory on my lap and was searching eagerly fo
r a name. I found it, picked up the phone, and dialled the number.
"Hello," I said. "Mr Royden? Mr John Royden?"
"Speaking." Well--it wasn't difficult to persuade the man to call around
and see me for a moment. I had never met him, but of course he knew my name
, both as an important collector of paintings and as a person of some conseq
uence in society. I was a big fish for him to catch.
"Let me see now, Mr Lampson," he said, "I think I ought to be free in abou
t a couple of hours. Will that be all right?"
I told him it would be fine, gave my address, and rang off.
I jumped out of bed. It was really remarkable how exhilarated I felt al
l of a sudden. One moment I had been in an agony of despair, contemplating
murder and suicide and I don't know what, the next, I was whistling an aria
from Puccini in my bath. Every now and again I caught myself rubbing my ha
nds together in a devilish fashion, and once, during my exercises, when I o
verbalanced doing a double-knee-bend, I sat on the floor and giggled like a
schoolboy.
At the appointed time Mr John Royden was shown in to my library and I g
ot up to meet him. He was a small neat man with a slightly ginger goatee be
ard. He wore a black velvet jacket, a rust-brown tie, a red pullover, and b
lack suede shoes. I shook his small neat hand.
"Good of you to come along so quickly, Mr Royden."
"Not at all, sir." The man's lips--like the lips of nearly all bearded men
--looked wet and naked, a trifle indecent, shining pink in among all that hair
. After telling him again how much I admired his work, I got straight down to
business.
"Mr Royden," I said. "I have a rather unusual request to make of you, som
ething quite personal in its way."

"Yes, Mr Lampson?" He was sitting in the chair opposite me and he cocked
his head over to one side, quick and perky like a bird.
"Of course, I know I can trust you to be discreet about anything I say."
"Absolutely, Mr Lampson."
"All right. Now my proposition is this: there is a certain lady in town
here whose portrait I would like you to paint. I very much want to possess a
fine painting of her. But there are certain complications. For example, I h
ave my own reasons for not wishing her to know that it is I who am commissio
ning the portrait."
"You mean..
"Exactly, Mr Royden. That is exactly what I mean. As a man of the world
I'm sure you will understand."
He smiled, a crooked little smile that only just came through his beard
, and he nodded his head knowingly up and down.
"Is it not possible," I said, "that a man might be--how shall I put it?-extremely fond of a lady and at the same time have his own good reasons for n
ot wishing her to know about it yet?"
"More than possible, Mr Lampson." with a man has to stalk his quarry wi
th great caution, waiting patiently for the right moment to reveal himself."
"Precisely, Mr Lampson."
"There are better ways of catching a bird than by chasing it through the
woods."
"Yes, indeed, Mr Lampson."
"Putting salt on its tail, for instance."
"Ha-ha?"
"All right, Mr Royden, I think you understand. Now--do you happen by a
ny chance to know a lady called Janet de Pelagia?"
"Janet de Pelagia? Let me see now--yes. At least, what I mean is I've hear
d of her. I couldn't exactly say I know her."
"That's a pity. It makes it a little more difficult. Do you think you could
get to meet her--perhaps at a cocktail party or something like that?"
"Shouldn't be too tricky, Mr Lampson."
"Good, because what I suggest is this: that you go up to her and tell her
she's the sort of model you've been searching for for years--just the right fa
ce, the right figure, the right coloured eyes. You know the sort of thing. The
n ask her if she'd mind sitting for you free of charge. Say you'd like to do a
picture of her for next year's Academy. I feel sure she'd be delighted to hel
p you, and honoured too, if I may say so. Then you will paint her and exhibit
the picture and deliver it to me after the show is over. No one but you need k
now that I have bought it."
The small round eyes of Mr Royden were watching me shrewdly, I thought,
and the head was again cocked over to one side. He was sitting on the edge o

f his chair, and in this position, with the pullover making a flash of red d
own his front, he reminded me of a robin on a twig listening for a suspiciou
s noise.
"There's really nothing wrong about it at all," I said. "Just call it--if yo
u like--a harmless little conspiracy being perpetrated by a... well by a rather
romantic old man."
"I know, Mr Lampson, I know... " He still seemed to be hesitating, so I sa
id quickly, "I'll be glad to pay you double your usual fee."
That did it. The man actually licked his lips. "Well, Mr Lampson, I must
say this sort of thing's not really in my line, you know. But all the same, i
t'd be a very heartless man who refused such a--shall I say such a romantic a
ssignment?"
"I should like a full-length portrait, Mr Royden, please. A large canvas-let me see about twice the size of that Manet on the wall there."
"About sixty by thirty-six?"
"Yes. And I should like her to be standing. That to my mind, is her most g
raceful attitude."
"I quite understand, Mr Lampson. And it'll be a pleasure to paint such a l
ovely lady."
I expect it will, I told myself. The way you go about it, my boy, I'm quite
sure it will, But I said, "All right, Mr Royden, then I'll leave it all to you.
And don't forget, please--this is a little secret between ourselves."
When he had gone I forced myself to sit still and take twenty-five deep
breaths. Nothing else would have restrained me from jumping up and shouting
for joy like an idiot. I have never in my life felt so exhilarated. My plan
was working! The most difficult part was already accomplished. There would b
e a wait now, a long wait. The way this man painted, it would take him sever
al months to finish the picture. Well, I would just have to be patient, that
's all.
I now decided, on the spur of the moment, that it would be best if I were
to go abroad in the interim; and the very next morning, after sending a mess
age to Janet (with whom, you will remember, I was due to dine that night) tel
ling her I had been called away, I left for Italy.
There, as always, I had a delightful time, marred only by a constant nerv
ous excitement caused by the thought of returning to the scene of action.
I eventually arrived back, four months later, in July, on the day after
the opening of the Royal Academy, and I found to my relief that everything
had gone according to plan during my absence. The picture of Janet de Pela
gia had been painted and hung in the Exhibition, and it was already the sub
ject of much favourable comment both by the critics and the public. I mysel
f refrained from going to see it, but Royden told me on the telephone that
there had been several inquiries by persons who wished to buy it, all of wh

om had been informed that it was not for sale. When the show was over, Royd
en delivered the picture to my house and received his money.
I immediately had it carried up to my workroom, and with mounting excit
ement I began to examine it closely. The man had painted her standing up in
a black evening dress and there was a red-plush sofa in the background. He
r left hand was resting on the back of a heavy chair, also of red-plush, an
d there was a huge crystal chandelier hanging from the ceiling.
My God, I thought, what a hideous thing! The portrait itself wasn't so b
ad. He had caught the woman's expression--the forward drop of the head, the
wide blue eyes, the large, ugly-beautiful mouth with the trace of a smile in
one corner. He had flattered her, of course. There wasn't a wrinkle on her
face or the slightest suggestion of fat under her chin. I bent forward to ex
amine the painting of the dress. Yes here the paint was thicker, much thicke
r. At this point, unable to wait another moment, I threw off my coat and pre
pared to go to work.
I should mention here that I am myself an expert cleaner and restorer o
f paintings. The cleaning, particularly, is a comparatively simple process
provided one has patience and a gentle touch, and those professionals who m
ake such a secret of their trade and charge such shocking prices get no bus
iness from me. Where my own pictures are concerned I always do the job myse
lf.
I poured out the turpentine and added a few drops of alcohol. I dipped
a small wad of cotton wool in the mixture, squeezed it out, and then gently
, so very gently, with a circular motion, I began to work upon the black pa
int of the dress. I could only hope that Royden had allowed each layer to d
ry thoroughly before applying the next, otherwise the two would merge and t
he process I had in mind would be impossible. Soon I would know. I was work
ing on one square inch of black dress somewhere around the lady's stomach a
nd I took plenty of time, cautiously testing and teasing the paint, adding
a drop or two more of alcohol to my mixture, testing again, adding another
drop until finally it was just strong enough to loosen the pigment.
For perhaps a whole hour I worked away on this little square of black, p
roceeding more and more gently as I came closer to the layer below. Then, a
tiny pink spot appeared, and gradually it spread and spread until the whole
of my square inch was a clear shining patch of pink. Quickly I neutralized w
ith pure turps.
So far so good. I knew now that the black paint could be removed without
disturbing what was underneath. So long as I was patient and industrious I
would easily be able to take it all off. Also, I had discovered the right mi
xture to use and just how hard I could safely rub, so things should go much
quicker now.
I must say it was rather an amusing business. I worked first from the mi

ddle of her body downward, and as the lower half of her dress came away bit
by bit on to my little wads of cotton, a queer pink undergarment began to re
veal itself. I didn't for the life of me know what the thing was called, but
it was a formidable apparatus constructed of what appeared to be a strong t
hick elastic material, and its purpose was apparently to contain and to comp
ress the woman's bulging figure into a neat streamlined shape, giving a quit
e false impression of slimness. As I travelled lower and lower down, I came
upon a striking arrangement of suspenders, also pink, which were attached to
this elastic armour and hung downwards four or five inches to grip the tops
of the stockings.
Quite fantastic the whole thing seemed to me as I stepped back a pace to
survey it. It gave me a strong sense of having somehow been cheated; for ha
d I not, during all these past months, been admiring the sylph-like figure o
f this lady? She was a faker. No question about it. But do many other female
s practise this sort of deception, I wondered. I knew, of course, that in th
e days of stays and corsets it was usual for ladies to strap themselves up;
yet for some reason I was under the impression that nowadays all they had to
do was diet.
When the whole of the lower half of the dress had come away, I immediat
ely turned my attention to the upper portion, working my way slowly upward
from the lady's middle. Here, around the midriff, there was an area of nake
d flesh; then higher up upon the bosom itself and actually containing it, I
came upon a contrivance made of some heavy black material edged with frill
y lace. This, I knew very well, was the brassiere--another formidable appli
ance upheld by an arrangement of black straps as skilfully and scientifical
ly rigged as the supporting cables of a suspension bridge.
Dear me, I thought. One lives and learns.
But now at last the job was finished, and I stepped back again to take a
final look at the picture. It was truly an astonishing sight! This woman, Jan
et de Pelagia, almost life size, standing there in her underwear--in a sort o
f drawing-room, I suppose it was--with a great chandelier above her head and
a red-plush chair by her side; and she herself--this was the most disturbing
part of all--looking so completely unconcerned, with the wide placid blue eye
s, the faintly smiling, ugly-beautiful mouth. Also I noticed, with something
of a shock, that she was exceedingly bow-legged, like a jockey. I tell you fr
ankly, the whole thing embarrassed me. I felt as though I had no right to be
in the room, certainly no right to stare. So after a while I went out and shu
t the door behind me. It seemed like the only decent thing to do.
Now, for the next and final step! And do not imagine simply because I hav
e not mentioned it lately that my thirst for revenge had in any way diminishe
d during the last few months. On the contrary, it had if anything increased;
and with the last act about to be performed, I can tell you I found it hard t

o contain myself. That night, for example, I didn't even go to bed.
You see, I couldn't wait to get the invitations out. I sat up all nigh
t preparing them and addressing the envelopes. There were twentytwo of the
m in all, and I wanted each to be a personal note. 'I'm having a little di
nner on Friday night, the twenty-second, at eight. I do hope you can come
along... I'm so looking forward to seeing you again The first, the most ca
refully phrased, was to Janet de Pelagia. In it I regretted not having see
n her for so long... I had been abroad... It was time we got together agai
n, etc., etc. The next was to Gladys Ponsonby. Then one to Lady Hermione G
irdlestone, another to Princess Bicheno, Mrs Cudbird, Sir Hubert Kaul, Mrs
Galbally, Peter EuanThomas, James Pisker, Sir Eustace Piegrome, Peter van
Santen, Elizabeth Moynihan, Lord Mulherrin, Bertram Sturt, Philip Corneli
us, Jack Hill, Lady Akeman, Mrs Icely, Humphrey KingHoward, Johnny O'Coffe
y, Mrs Uvary, and the Dowager Countess of Waxworth.
It was a carefully selected list, containing as it did the most distinguish
ed men, the most brilliant and influential women in the top crust of our societ
y.
I was well aware that dinner at my house was regarded as quite an occasio
n; everybody liked to come. And now, as I watched the point of my pen moving
swiftly over the paper, I could almost see the ladies in their pleasure picki
ng up their bedside telephones the morning the invitations arrived, shrill vo
ices calling to shriller voices over the wires... 'Lionel's giving a party...
he's asked you too? My dear, how nice... his food is always so good... and s
uch a lovely man, isn't he though, yes..
Is that really what they would say? It suddenly occurred to me that it migh
t not be like that at all. More like this perhaps: 'I agree, my dear, yes, not
a bad old man... but a bit of a bore, don't you think?... What did you say?
¥ dull? But desperately, my dear. You've hit the nail on the head... did
you ever hear what Janet de Pelagia once said about him?... Ah yes, I thought
you'd heard that one... screamingly funny, don't you think?... poor Janet...
how she stood it as long as she did I don't know.
Anyway, I got the invitations off, and within a couple of days everybo
dy with the exception of Mrs Cudbird and Sir Hubert Kaul, who were away, h
ad accepted with pleasure.
At eight-thirty on the evening of the twentysecond, my large drawing-roo
m was filled with people. They stood about the room, admiring the pictures,
drinking their Martinis, talking with loud voices. The women smelled strongl
y of scent, the men were pink-faced and carefully buttoned up in their dinne
r-jackets. Janet de Pelagia was wearing the same black dress she had used fo
r the portrait, and every time I caught sight of her, a kind of huge bubblevision--as in those absurd cartoons--would float up above my head, and in it
I would see Janet in her underclothes, the black brassiere, the pink elasti

c belt, the suspenders, the jockey's legs.
I moved from group to group, chatting amiably with them all, listening
to their talk. Behind me I could hear Mrs Galbally telling Sir Eustace Pieg
rome and James Pisker how the man at the next table to hers at Claridges th
e night before had had red lipstick on his white moustache. "Simply plaster
ed with it," she kept on saying, "and the old boy was ninety if he was a da
y... " On the other side, Lady Girdlestone was telling somebody where one c
ould get truffles cooked in brandy, and I could see Mrs Icely whispering so
mething to Lord Mulherrin while his Lordship kept shaking his head slowly f
rom side to side like an old and dispirited metronome.
Dinner was announced, and we all moved out.
"My goodness!" they cried as they entered the dining-room. "How dark an
d sinister!"
"I can hardly see a thing!"
"What divine little candles!"
"But Lionel, how romantic!"
There were six very thin candles set about two feet apart from each other
down the centre of the long table. Their small flames made a little glow of
light around the table itself, but left the rest of the room in darkness. It
was an amusing arrangement and apart from the fact that it suited my purpose
well, it made a pleasant change. The guests soon settled themselves in their
right places and the meal began.
They all seemed to enjoy the candlelight and things went famously, thou
gh for some reason the darkness caused them to speak much louder than usual
. Janet de Pelagia's voice struck me as being particulary strident. She was
sitting next to Lord Muiherrin, and I could hear her telling him about the
boring time she had had at Cap Ferrat the week before. "Nothing but French
men," she kept saying. "Nothing but Frenchmen in the whole place...
For my part, I was watching the candles. They were so thin that I knew it
would not be long before they burned down to their bases. Also I was mighty
nervous--I will admit that--but at the same time intensely exhilarated, almos
t to the point of drunkenness. Every time I heard Janet's voice or caught sig
ht of her face shadowed in the light of the candles, a little ball of excitem
ent exploded inside me and I felt the fire of it running under my skin.
They were eating their strawberries when at last I decided the time had c
ome. I took a deep breath and in a loud voice I said, "I'm afraid we'll have
to have the lights on now. The candles are nearly finished. Mary," I called.
"Oh, Mary, switch on the lights, will you please,"
There was a moment of silence after my announcement. I heard the maid w
alking over to the door, then the gentle click of the switch and the room w
as flooded with a blaze of light. They all screwed up their eyes, opened th
em again, gazed about them.

At that point I got up from my chair and slid quietly from the room, but
as I went I saw a sight that I shall never forget as long as I live. It was
Janet, with both hands in mid-air, stopped, frozen rigid, caught in the act
of gesticulating towards someone across the table. Her mouth had dropped op
en two inches and she wore the surprised, not-quite-understanding look of a
person who precisely one second before has been shot dead, right through the
heart.
In the hall outside I paused and listened to the beginning of the uproa
r, the shrill cries of the ladies and the outraged unbelieving exclamations
of the men; and soon there was a great hum of noise with everybody talking
or shouting at the same time. Then--and this was the sweetest moment of al
l--I heard Lord Mulherrin's voice, roaring above the rest, "Here! Someone!
Hurry! Give her some water quick!"
Out in the street the chauffeur helped me into my car, and soon we we
re away from London and bowling merrily along the Great North Road toward
s this, my other house, which is only ninety-five miles from Town anyway.
The next two days I spent in gloating. I mooned around in a dream of ec
stasy, half drowned in my own complacency and filled with a sense of pleasu
re so great that it constantly gave me pins and needles all along the lower
parts of my legs. It wasn't until this morning when Gladys Ponsonby called
me on the phone that I suddenly came to my senses and realized I was not a
hero at all but an outcast. She informed me--with what I thought was just
a trace of relish that everybody was up in arms, that all of them, all my o
ld and loving friends were saying the most terrible things about me and had
sworn never never to speak to me again. Except her, she kept saying. Every
body except her. And didn't I think it would be rather cosy, she asked, if
she were to come down and stay with me a few days to cheer me up?
I'm afraid I was too upset by that time even to answer her politely. I p
ut the phone down and went away to weep.
Then at noon today came the final crushing blow. The post arrived, and
with it--I can hardly bring myself to write about it, I am so ashamed--came
a letter, the sweetest, most tender little note imaginable from none other
than Janet de Pelagia herself. She forgave me completely, she wrote, for e
verything I had done. She knew it was only a joke and I must not listen to
the horrid things other people were saying about me. She loved me as she al
ways had and always would to her dying day.
Oh, what a cad, what a brute I felt when I read this! The more so when I
found that she had actually sent me by the same post a small present as an ad
ded sign of her affection--a half-pound jar of my favourite food of all, fres
h caviare.
I can never under any circumstances resist good caviare. It is perhaps my
greatest weakness. So although I naturally had no appetite whatsoever for fo

od at dinner-time this evening, I must confess I took a few spoonfuls of the
stuff in an effort to console myself in my misery. It is even possible that I
took a shade too much, because I haven't been feeling any too chipper this l
ast hour or so. Perhaps I ought to go up right away and get myself some bicar
bonate of soda. I can easily come back and finish this later, when I'm in bet
ter trim.
You know--now I come to think of it, I really do feel rather ill all of a su
dden.

The Great Automatic Grammatizator
WELL, Knipe, my boy. Now that it's finished. I just called you in to tell you
I think you've done a fine job."
Adolph Knipe stood still in front of Mr Bohien's desk. There seemed to be
no enthusiasm in him at all.
"Aren't you pleased?"
"Oh yes, Mr Bohien."
"Did you see what the papers said this morning?"
"No sir, I didn't."
The man behind the desk pulled a folded newspaper towards him, and began
to read: "The building of the great automatic computing engine, ordered by
the government some time ago, is now complete. It is probably the fastest el
ectronic calculating machine in the world today. Its function is to satisfy
the ever-increasing need of science, industry, and administration for rapid
mathematical calculation which, in the past, by traditional methods, would h
ave been physically impossible, or would have required more time than the pr
oblems justified. The speed with which the new engine works, said Mr John Bo
hien, head of the firm of electrical engineers mainly responsible for its co
nstruction, may be grasped by the fact that it can provide the correct answe
r in five seconds to a problem that would occupy a mathematician for a month
. In three minutes, it can produce a calculation that by hand (if it were po
ssible) would fill half a million sheets of foolscap paper. The automatic co
mputing engine uses pulses of electricity, generated at the rate of a millio
n a second, to solve all calculations that resolve themselves into addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division. For practical purposes there is
no limit to what it can do... Mr Bohien glanced up at the long, melancholy f
ace of the younger man. "Aren't you proud, Knipe? Aren't you pleased."
"Of course, Mr Bohien."
"I don't think I have to remind you that your own contribution, especially
to the original plans, was an important one. In fact, I might go so far as to

say that without you and some of your ideas, this project might still be on t
he drawing-boards today."
Adolph Knipe moved his feet on the carpet, and he watched the two small
white hands of his chief, the nervous fingers playing with a paperclip, unbe
nding it, straightening out the hairpin curves. He didn't like the man's han
ds. He didn't like his face either, with the tiny mouth and the narrow purpl
e-coloured lips. It was unpleasant the way only the lower lip moved when he
talked.
"Is anything bothering you, Knipe? Anything on your mind?"
"Oh no, Mr Bohlen. No."
"How would you like to take a week's holiday? Do you good. You've earne
d it."
"Oh, I don't know, sir."
The older man waited, watching this tall, thin person who stood so sloppi
ly before him. He was a difficult boy. Why couldn't he stand up straight? Alw
ays drooping and untidy, with spots on his jacket, and hair falling all over
his face.
"I'd like you to take a holiday, Knipe. You need it."
"All right, sir. If you wish."
"Take a week. Two weeks if you like. Go somewhere warm. Get some suns
hine. Swim. Relax. Sleep. Then come back, and we'll have another talk abo
ut the future."
Adolph Knipe went home by bus to his tworoom apartment. He threw his c
oat on the sofa, poured himself a drink of whisky, and sat down in front o
f the typewriter that was on the table. Mr Bohlen was right. Of course he
was right. Except that he didn't know the half of it. He probably thought
it was a woman. Whenever a young man gets depressed, everybody thinks it's
a woman.
He leaned forward and began to read through the half-finished sheet of t
yping still in the machine. It was headed 'A Narrow Escape', and it began 'T
he night was dark and stormy, the wind whistled in the trees, the rain poure
d down like cats and dogs...
Adolph Knipe took a sip of whisky, tasting the malty-bitter flavour, fee
ling the trickle of cold liquid as it travelled down his throat and settled
in the top of his stomach, cool at first, then spreading and becoming warm,
making a little area of warmness in the gut. To hell with Mr John Bohlen any
way. And to hell with the great electrical computing machine. To hell with A
t exactly that moment, his eyes and mouth began slowly to open, in a sort of
wonder, and slowly he raised his head and became still, absolutely motionle
ss, gazing at the wall opposite with this look that was more perhaps of asto
nishment than of wonder, but quite fixed now, unmoving, and remaining thus f
or forty, fifty, sixty seconds. Then gradually (the head still motionless),

a subtle change spreading over the face, astonishment becoming pleasure, ver
y slight at first, only around the corners of the mouth, increasing graduall
y, spreading out until at last the whole face was open wide and shining with
extreme delight. It was the first time Adolph Knipe had smiled in many, man
y months.
"Of course," he said, speaking aloud, "it's completely ridiculous." Again
he smiled, raising his upper lip and baring his teeth in a queerly sensual man
ner.
"It's a delicious idea, but so impracticable it doesn't really bear thinking ab
out at all."
From then on, Adolph Knipe began to think about nothing else. The idea
fascinated him enormously, at first because it gave him a promise--however
remote--of revenging himself in a most devilish manner upon his greatest en
emies. From this angle alone, he toyed idly with it for perhaps ten or fift
een minutes; then all at once he found himself examining it quite seriously
as a practical possibility. He took paper and made some preliminary notes.
But he didn't get far. He found himself, almost immediately, up against th
e old truth that a machine, however ingenious, is incapable of original tho
ught. It can handle no problems except those that resolve themselves into m
athematical terms--problems that contain one, and only one, correct answer.
This was a stumper. There didn't seem any way around it. A machine cann
ot have a brain. On the other hand, it can have a memory, can it not? Their
own electronic calculator had a marvellous memory. Simply by converting el
ectric pulses, through a column of mercury, into supersonic waves, it could
store away at least a thousand numbers at a time, extracting any one of th
em at the precise moment it was needed. Would it not be possible, therefore
, on this principle, to build a memory section of almost unlimited size?
Now what about that?
Then suddenly, he was struck by a powerful but simple little truth, and i
t was this: that English grammar is governed by rules that are almost mathema
tical in their strictness! Given the words, and given the sense of what is to
be said, then there is only one correct order in which those words can be ar
ranged.
No, he thought, that isn't quite accurate. In many sentences there are se
veral alternative positions for words and phrases, all of which may be gramma
tically correct. But what the hell. The theory itself is basically true. Ther
efore, it stands to reason that an engine built along the lines of the electr
ic computer could be adjusted to arrange words (instead of numbers) in their
right order according to the rules of grammar. Give it the verbs, the nouns,
the adjectives, the pronouns, store them in the memory section as a vocabular
y, and arrange for them to be extracted as required. Then feed it with plots
and leave it to write the sentences.

There was no stopping Knipe now. He went to work immediately, and there
followed during the next few days a period of intense labour. The living-r
oom became littered with sheets of paper: formulae and calculations; lists
of words, thousands and thousands of words; the plots of stories, curiously
broken up and subdivided; huge extracts from Roget's Thesaurus; pages fill
ed with the first names of men and women; hundreds of surnames taken from t
he telephone directory; intricate drawings of wires and circuits and switch
es and thermionic valves; drawings of machines that could punch holes of di
fferent shapes in little cards, and of a strange electric typewriter that c
ould type ten thousand words a minute. Also a kind of control panel with a
series of small push-buttons, each one labelled with the name of a famous A
merican magazine.
He was working in a mood of exultation, prowling around the room amidst
this littering of paper, rubbing his hands together, talking out loud to him
self; and sometimes, with a sly curl of the nose he would mutter a series of
murderous imprecations in which the word 'editor' seemed always to be prese
nt. On the fifteenth day of continuous work, he collected the papers into tw
o large folders which he carried--almost at a run--to the offices of John Bo
hien Inc., electrical engineers.
Mr Bohien was pleased to see him back.
"Well Knipe, good gracious me, you look a hundred per cent better. Yo
u have a good holiday? Where'd you go?"
He's just as ugly and untidy as ever, Mr Bohien thought. Why doesn't he
stand up straight? He looks like a bent stick. "You look a hundred per cent
better, my boy." I wonder what he's grinning about. Every time I see him, hi
s ears seem to have got larger.
Adolph Knipe placed the folders on the desk. "Look, Mr Bohien!" he crie
d. "Look at these!"
Then he poured out his story. He opened the folders and pushed the plans
in front of the astonished little man. He talked for over an hour, explaining
everything, and when he had finished, he stepped back, breathless, flushed,
waiting for the verdict.
"You know what I think, Knipe? I think you're nuts." Careful now, Mr Bohi
en told himself. Treat him carefully. He's valuable, this one is. If only he
didn't look so awful, with that long horse face and the big teeth. The fellow
had ears as big as rhubarb leaves.
"But Mr Bohien! It'll work! I've proved to you it'll work! You can't deny t
hat!"
"Take it easy now, Knipe. Take it easy, and listen to me."
Adolph Knipe watched his man, disliking him more every second.
"This idea," Mr Bohien's lower lip was saying, "is very ingenious--I migh
t almost say brilliant--and it only goes to confirm my opinion of your abilit

ies, Knipe. But don't take it too seriously. After all, my boy, what possible
use can it be to us? Who on earth wants a machine for writing stories? And w
here's the money in it, anyway? Just tell me that."
"May I sit down, sir?"
"Sure, take a seat."
Adolph Knipe seated himself on the edge of a chair. The older man wa
tched him with alert brown eyes, wondering what was coming now.
"I would like to explain something Mr Bohien, if I may, about how I came
to do all this."
"Go right ahead, Knipe." He would have to be humoured a little now, Mr B
ohlen told himself. The boy was really valuable--a sort of genius, almost--w
orth his weight in gold to the firm. Just look at these papers here. Darndes
t thing you ever saw. Astonishing piece of work. Quite useless, of course. N
o commercial value. But it proved again the boy's ability.
"It's a sort of confession, I suppose, Mr Bohien. I think it explains why I
've always been so... so kind of worried."
"You tell me anything you want, Knipe. I'm here to help you--you know t
hat."
The young man clasped his hands together tight on his lap, hugging hims
elf with his elbows. It seemed as though suddenly he was feeling very cold.
"You see, Mr Bohlen, to tell the honest truth, I don't really care much for
my work here. I know I'm good at it and all that sort of thing, but my heart's
not in it. It's not what I want to do most."
Up went Mr Bohien's eyebrows, quick like a spring. His whole body becam
e very still.
"You see, sir, all my life I've wanted to be a writer."
"A writer!"
"Yes, Mr Bohien. You may not believe it, but every bit of spare time I've
had, I've spent writing stories. In the last ten years I've written hundreds,
literally hundreds of short stories. Five hundred and sixty-six, to be precise
. Approximately one a week."
"Good heavens, man! What on earth did you do that for?"
"All I know, sir, is I have the urge."
"What sort of urge?"
"The creative urge, Mr Bohien." Every time he looked up he saw Mr Bohi
en's lips. They were growing thinner and thinner, more and more purple.
"And may I ask you what you do with these stories, Knipe?"
"Well sir, that's the trouble. No one will buy them. Each time I finish on
e, I send it out on the rounds. It goes to one magazine after another. That's
all that happens, Mr Bohien, and they simply send them back. It's very depress
ing."
Mr Bohien relaxed. "I can see quite well how you feel, my boy." His voice

was dripping with sympathy. "We all go through it one time or another in our
lives. But now now that you've had proof--positive proof--from the experts t
hemselves, from the editors, that your stories are--what shall I say--rather
unsuccessful, it's time to leave off. Forget it, my boy. Just forget all abou
t it."
"No, Mr Bohien! No! That's not true! I know my stories are good. My h
eavens, when you compare them with the stuff some of those magazines prin
t--oh my word, Mr Bohien!--the sloppy, boring stuff that you see in the m
agazines week after week--why, it drives me mad!"
"Now wait a minute, my boy.
"Do you ever read the magazines, Mr B ohien?"
"You'll pardon me, Knipe, but what's all this got to do with your machine
?"
"Everything, Mr Bohien, absolutely everything! What I want to tell you i
s, I've made a study of magazines, and it seems that each one tends to have
its own particular type of story. The writers--the successful ones--know thi
s, and they write accordingly."
"Just a minute, my boy. Calm yourself down, will you. I don't think all th
is is getting us anywhere."
"Please, Mr Bohien, hear me through. It's all terribly important." He p
aused, to catch his breath. He was properly worked up now, throwing his han
ds around as he talked. The long, toothy face, with the big ears on either
side, simply shone with enthusiasm, and there was an excess of saliva in hi
s mouth which caused him to speak his words wet. "So you see, on my machine
, by having an adjustable co-ordinator between the 'plot-memory' section an
d the 'word-memory' section I am able to produce any type of story I desire
simply by pressing the required button."
"Yes, I know, Knipe, I know. This is all very interesting, but what's the po
int of it?"
"Just this, Mr Bohlen. The market is limited. We've got to be able to prod
uce the right stuff, at the right time, whenever we want it. It's a matter of
business, that's all. I'm looking at it from your point of view now--as a comm
ercial proposition."
"My dear boy, it can't possibly be a commercial proposition ever. You kn
ow as well as I do what it costs to build one of these machines."
"Yes sir, I do. But with due respect, I don't believe you know what the ma
gazines pay writers for stories."
"What do they pay?"
"Anything up to twenty-five hundred dollars. It probably averages around
a thousand."
Mr Bohlen jumped.
"Yes sir, it's true."

"Absolutely impossible, Knipe! Ridiculous!"
"No sir, it's true."
"You mean to sit there and tell me that these magazines pay out money lik
e that to a man for... just for scribbling off a story! Good heavens, Knipe!
Whatever next! Writers must all be millionaires!"
"That's exactly it, Mr Bohlen! That's where the machine comes in. Liste
n a minute, sir, while I tell you some more. I've got it all worked out. Th
e big magazines are carrying approximately three fiction stories in each is
sue. Now, take the fifteen most important magazines--the ones paying the mo
st money. A few of them are monthlies, but most of them come out every week
. All right. That makes, let us say, around forty big stories being bought
each week. That's forty thousand dollars. So with our machine when we get i
t working properly--we can collar nearly the whole of this market!"
"My dear boy, you're mad!"
"No sir, honestly, it's true what I say. Don't you see that with volume
alone we'll completely overwhelm them! This machine can produce a five-tho
usand word story, all typed and ready for despatch, in thirty seconds. How
can the writers compete with that? I ask you, Mr Bohien, how?"
At that point, Adolph Knipe noticed a slight change in the man's express
ion, an extra brightness in the eyes, the nostrils distending, the whole fac
e becoming still, almost rigid. Quickly, he continued. "Nowadays, Mr Bohien,
the handmade article hasn't a hope. It can't possibly compete with mass-pro
duction, especially in this country you know that. Carpets... chairs
shoes... bricks... crockery... anything you like to mention they're all made
by machinery now. The quality may be inferior, but that doesn't matter. It'
s the cost of production that counts. And stories--well--they're just anothe
r product, like carpets and chairs, and no one cares how you produce them so
long as you deliver the goods. We'll sell them wholesale, Mr Bohlen! We'll
undercut every writer in the country! We'll corner the market!"
Mr Bohlen edged up straighter in his chair. He was leaning forward now,
both elbows on the desk, the face alert, the small brown eyes resting on the
speaker.
"I still think it's impracticable, Knipe."
"Forty thousand a week!" cried Adolph Knipe. "And if we halve the price,
making it twenty thousand a week, that's still a million a year!" And softl
y he added, "You didn't get any million a year for building the old electron
ic calculator, did you, Mr Bohien?"
"But seriously now, Knipe. D'you really think they'd buy them?"
"Listen, Mr Bohlen. Who on earth is going to want custom-made stories whe
n they can get the other kind at half the price? It stands to reason, doesn't
it?"
"And how will you sell them? Who will you say has written them?"

"We'll set up our own literary agency, and we'll distribute them through t
hat. And we'll invent all the names we want for the writers."
"I don't like it, Knipe. To me, that smacks of trickery, does it not?"
"And another thing, Mr Bohlen. There's all manner of valuable by-produc
ts once you've got started. Take advertising, for example. Beer manufacture
rs and people like that are willing to pay good money these days if famous
writers will lend their names to their products. Why, my heavens, Mr Bohlen
! This isn't any children's plaything we're talking about. It's big business."
"Don't get too ambitious, my boy."
"And another thing. There isn't any reason why we shouldn't put your nam
e, Mr Bohlen, on some of the better stories, if you wished it."
"My goodness, Knipe. What should I want that for?"
"I don't know, sir, except that some writers get to be very much respect
ed--like Mr Erle Gardner or Kathleen Morris, for example. We've got to have
names, and I was certainly thinking of using my own on one or two stories, j
ust to help out."
"A writer, eh?" Mr Bohlen said, musing. "Well, it would surely surpris
e them over at the club when they saw my name in the magazines--the good m
agazines."
"That's right, Mr Bohien!"
For a moment, a dreamy, faraway look came into Mr Bohien's eyes, and he
smiled. Then he stirred himself and began leafing through the plans that l
ay before him.
"One thing I don't quite understand, Knipe. Where do the plots come fro
m? The machine can't possibly invent plots."
"We feed those in, sir. That's no problem at all. Everyone has plots. The
re's three or four hundred of them written down in that folder there on your
left. Feed them straight into the 'plot-memory' section of the machine."
"Go on."
"There are many other little refinements too, Mr Bohlen. You'll see them
all when you study the plans carefully. For example, there's a trick that nea
rly every writer uses, of inserting at least one long, obscure word into each
story. This makes the reader think that the man is very wise and clever. So
I have the machine do the same thing. There'll be a whole stack of long words
stored away just for this purpose."
"Where?"
"In the 'word-memory' section," he said, epexegetically.
Through most of that day the two men discussed the possibilities of the
new engine. In the end, Mr Bohien said he would have to think about it som
e more. The next morning, he was quietly enthusiastic. Within a week, he wa
s completely sold on the idea.
"What we'll have to do, Knipe, is to say that we're merely building anothe

r mathematical calculator, but of a new type. That'll keep the secret."
"Exactly, Mr Bohien."
And in six months the machine was completed. It was housed in a separa
te brick building at the back of the premises, and now that it was ready f
or action, no one was allowed near it excepting Mr Bohien and Adolph Knipe.
It was an exciting moment when the two men--the one, short, plump, brev
iped--the other tall, thin and toothy--stood in the corridor before the con
trol panel and got ready to run off the first story. All around them were w
alls dividing up into many small corridors, and the walls were covered with
wiring and plugs and switches and huge glass valves. They were both nervou
s, Mr Bohlen hopping from one foot to the other, quite unable to keep still
. "Which button?" Adolph Knipe asked, eyeing a row of small white discs tha
t resembled the keys of a typewriter. "You choose, Mr Bohlen. Lots of magaz
ines to pick from--Saturday Evening Post, Collier's, Ladies' Home Journal-any one you like."
"Goodness me, boy! How do I know?" He was jumping up and down like
a man with hives.
"Mr Bohien," Adolph Knipe said gravely, "do you realize that at this mom
ent, with your little finger alone, you have it in your power to become the
most versatile writer on this continent?"
"Listen Knipe, just get on with it, will you please--and cut out the prelimi
naries."
"Okay, Mr Bohien. Then we'll make it... let me see--this one. How's t
hat?" He extended one finger and pressed down a button with the name TODA
Y'S WOMAN printed across it in diminutive black type. There was a sharp c
lick, and when he took his finger away, the button remained down, below t
he level of the others.
"So much for the selection," he said. "Now--here we go!" He reached up a
nd pulled a switch on the panel. Immediately, the room was filled with a lou
d humming noise, and a crackling of electric sparks, and the jingle of many,
tiny, quickly-moving levers; and almost in the same instant, sheets of quar
to paper began sliding out from a slot to the right of the control panel and
dropping into a basket below. They came out quick, one sheet a second, and
in less than half a minute it was all over. The sheets stopped coming.
"That's it!" Adolph Knipe cried. "There's your story!"
They grabbed the sheets and began to read. The first one they picked
up started as follows: 'Aifkjmbsaoegweztpplnvoqudskigt&, fuhpekanvbertyui
olkjhgfdsazxcvbnm, peruitrehdjkg mvnb, wmsuy... 'They looked at the other
s. The style was roughly similar in all of them. Mr Bohien began to shout
. The younger man tried to calm him down.
"It's all right, sir. Really it is. It only needs a little adjustment. We'
ve got a connection wrong somewhere, that's all. You must remember, Mr Bohlen,

there's over a million feet of wiring in this room. You can't expect everythi
ng to be right first time."
"It'll never work," Mr Bohlen said.
"Be patient, sir. Be patient."
Adolph Knipe set out to discover the fault, and in four days' time he anno
unced that all was ready for the next try.
"It'll never work," Mr Bohien said. "I know it'll never work."
Knipe smiled and pressed the selector button marked Reader's Digest. The
n he pulled the switch, and again the strange, exciting, humming sound fille
d the room. One page of typescript flew out of the slot into the basket.
"Where's the rest?" Mr Bohien cried. "It's Stopped! It's gone wrong!"
"No sir, it hasn't. It's exactly right. It's for the Digest, don't you
see?" This time it began. 'Fewpeopleyetknowthatarevolutionarynewcurehasbeen
discoveredwhichmaywellbringp ermanentrelieftosufferersofthemostdreadeddisea
seofourtime... ' And so on.
"It's gibberish!" Mr Bohien shouted.
"No sir, it's fine. Can't you see? It's simply that she's not breaking up t
he words. That's an easy adjustment. But the story's there. Look, Mr Bohien, lo
ok! It's all there except that the words are joined together."
And indeed it was.
On the next try a few days later, everything was perfect, even the punc
tuation. The first story they ran off, for a famous women's magazine, was a
solid, plotty story of a boy who wanted to better himself with his rich em
ployer. This boy arranged, so that story went, for a friend to hold up the
rich man's daughter on a dark night when she was driving home. Then the boy
himself, happening by, knocked the gun out of his friend's hand and rescue
d the girl. The girl was grateful. But the father was suspicious. He questi
oned the boy sharply. The boy broke down and confessed. Then the father, in
stead of kicking him out of the house, said that he admired the boy's resou
rcefulness. The girl admired his honesty--and his looks. The father promise
d him to be head of the Accounts Department. The girl married him.
"It's tremendous, Mr Bohien! It's exactly right!"
"Seems a bit sloppy to me, my boy!"
"No sir, it's a seller, a real seller!"
In his excitement, Adolph Knipe promptly ran off six more stories in as
many minutes. All of them--except one, which for some reason came out a tr
ifle lewd--seemed entirely satisfactory.
Mr Bohlen was now mollified. He agreed to set up a literary agency in a
n office downtown, and to put Knipe in charge. In a couple of weeks, this w
as accomplished. Then Knipe mailed out the first dozen stories. He put his
own name to four of them, Mr Bohien's to one, and for the others he simply
invented names.

Five of these stories were promptly accepted. The one with Mr Bohien's n
ame on it was turned down with a letter from the fiction editor saying, 'Thi
s is a skilful job, but in our opinion it doesn't quite come off. We would l
ike to see more of this writer's work... ' Adolph Knipe took a cab out to th
e factory and ran off another story for the same magazine. He again put Mr B
ohien's name to it, and mailed it immediately. That one they bought.
The money started pouring in. Knipe slowly and carefully stepped up the o
utput, and in six months' time he was delivering thirty stories a week, and s
elling about half.
He began to make a name for himself in literary circles as a prolific a
nd successful writer. So did Mr Bohlen; but not quite such a good name, alt
hough he didn't know it. At the same time, Knipe was building up a dozen or
more fictitious persons as promising young authors. Everything was going f
ine.
At this point it was decided to adapt the machine for writing novels as we
ll as stories. Mr Bohien, thirsting now for greater honours in the literary wo
rld, insisted that Knipe go to work at once on this prodigious task.
"I want to do a novel," he kept saying. "I want to do a novel."
"And so you will, sir. And so you will. But please be patient. This is a
very complicated adjustment I have to make."
"Everyone tells me I ought to do a novel," Mr Bohien cried. "All sorts o
f publishers are chasing after me day and night begging me to stop fooling a
round with stories and do something really important instead. A novel's the
only thing that counts--that's what they say."
"We're going to do novels," Knipe told him. "Just as many as we want. Bu
t please be patient."
"Now listen to me, Knipe. What I'm going to do is a serious novel, someth
ing that'll make 'em sit up and take notice. I've been getting rather tired o
f the sort of stories you've been putting my name to lately. As a matter of f
act, I'm none too sure you haven't been trying to make a monkey out of me."
"A monkey, Mr Bohlen?"
"Keeping all the best ones for yourself, that's what you've been doing."
"Oh no, Mr Bohlen! No!"
"So this time I'm going to make damn sure I write a high class intelligen
t book. You understand that."
"Look, Mr Bohlen. With the sort of switchboard I'm rigging up, you'll b
e able to write any sort of book you want." And this was true, for within a
nother couple of months, the genius of Adolph Knipe had not only adapted th
e machine for novel writing, but had constructed a marvellous new control s
ystem which enabled the author to pre-select literally any type of plot and
any style of writing he desired. There were so many dials and levers on th
e thing, it looked like the instrument panel of some enormous aeroplane.

First, by depressing one of a series of master buttons, the writer made
his primary decision; historical, satirical, philosophical, political, roman
tic, erotic, humorous, or straight. Then, from the second row (the basic but
tons), he chose his theme: army life, pioneer days, civil war, world war, ra
cial problem, wild west, country life, childhood memories, seafaring, the se
a bottom and many, many more. The third row of buttons gave a choice of lite
rary style: classical, whimsical, racy, Hemingway, Faulkner, Joyce, feminine
, etc. The fourth row was for characters, the fifth for wordage--and so on a
nd so on--ten long rows of pre-selector buttons.
But that wasn't all. Control had also to be exercised during the actual w
riting process (which took about fifteen minutes per novel), and to do this t
he author had to sit, as it were, in the driver's seat, and pull (or push) a
battery of labelled stops, as on an organ. By so doing, he was able continual
ly to modulate or merge fifty different and variable qualities such as tensio
n, surprise, humour, pathos, and mystery. Numerous dials and gauges on the da
shboard itself told him throughout exactly how far along he was with his work.
Finally, there was the question of 'passion'. From a careful study of th
e books at the top of the best-seller lists for the past year, Adolph Knipe
had decided that this was the most important ingredient of all--a magical ca
talyst that somehow or other could transform the dullest novel into a howlin
g success at any rate financially. But Knipe also knew that passion was powe
rful, heady stuff, and must be prudently dispensed--the right proportions at
the right moments; and to ensure this, he had devised an independent contro
l consisting of two sensitive sliding adjustors operated by foot-pedals, sim
ilar to the throttle and brake in a car. One pedal governed the percentage o
f passion to be injected, the other regulated its intensity. There was no do
ubt, of course and this was the only drawback--that the writing of a novel b
y the Knipe methods was going to be rather like flying a plane and driving a
car and playing an organ all at the same time, but this did not trouble the
inventor. When all was ready, he proudly escorted Mr Bohlen into the machin
e house and began to explain the operating procedure for the new wonder.
"Good God, Knipe! I'll never be able to do all that! Dammit man, it'd be e
asier to write the thing by hand!"
"You'll soon get used to it, Mr Bohlen, I promise you. In a week or two, yo
u'll be doing it without hardly thinking. It's just like learning to drive."
Well, it wasn't quite as easy as that, but after many hours of practice, M
r Bohien began to get the hang of it, and finally, late one evening, he told K
nipe to make ready for running off the first novel. It was a tense moment, wit
h the fat little man crouching nervously in the driver's seat, and the tall to
othy Knipe fussing excitedly around him.
"I intend to write an important novel, Knipe."
"I'm sure you will, sir. I'm sure you will."

With one finger, Mr Bohlen carefully pressed the necessary pre-selector
buttons: Master button--satirical Subject--racial problem Style--classical C
haracters--six men, four women, one infant Length fifteen chapters.
At the same time he had his eye particularly upon three organ stops mar
ked power, mystery, profundity.
"Are you ready, sir?"
"Yes, yes, I'm ready."
Knipe pulled the switch. The great engine hummed. There was a deep whir
ring sound from the oiled movement of fifty thousand cogs and rods and leve
rs; then came the drumming of the rapid electrical typewriter, setting up a
shrill, almost intolerable clatter. Out into the basket flew the typewritt
en pages--one every two seconds. But what with the noise and the excitement
and having to play upon the stops, and watch the chapter-counter and the p
ace-indicator and the passion-gauge, Mr Bohien began to panic. He reacted i
n precisely the way a learner driver does in a car--by pressing both feet h
ard down on the pedals and keeping them there until the thing stopped.
"Congratulations on your first novel," Knipe said, picking up the great b
undle of typed pages from the basket.
Little pearls of sweat were oozing out all over Mr Bohlen's face. "It sur
e was hard work, my boy."
"But you got it done, sir. You got it done."
"Let me see it, Knipe. How does it read?"
He started to go through the first chapter, passing each finished page to
the younger man.
"Good heavens, Knipe! What's this!" Mr Bohlen's thin purple fish-lip wa
s moving slightly as it mouthed the words, his cheeks were beginning slowly
to inflate.
"But look here, Knipe! This is outrageous!"
"I must say it's a bit fruity, sir."
"Fruity! It's perfectly revolting! I can't possibly put my name to this!"
"Quite right, sir. Quite right!"
"Knipe! Is this some nasty trick you've been playing on me?"
"Oh no, sir! No!"
"It certainly looks like it."
"You don't think, Mr Bohien, that you mightn't have been pressing a littl
e hard on the passion-control pedals, do you?"
"My dear boy, how should I know."
"Why don't you try another?"
So Mr Bohlen ran off a second novel, and this time it went according to p
lan.
Within a week, the manuscript had been read and accepted by an enthusi
astic publisher. Knipe followed with one in his own name, then made a doze

n more for good measure. In no time at all, Adolph Knipe's Literary Agency
had become famous for its large stable of promising young novelists. And
once again the money started rolling in.
It was at this stage that young Knipe began to display a real talent for big
business.
"See here, Mr Bohien," he said. "We still got too much competition. Why d
on't we just absorb all the other writers in the country?"
Mr Bohlen, who now sported a bottle-green velvet jacket and allowed his
hair to cover twothirds of his ears, was quite content with things the way
they were. "Don't know what you mean, my boy. You can't just absorb writer
s."
"Of course you can, sir. Exactly like Rockefeller did with his oil compani
es. Simply buy 'em out, and if they won't sell, squeeze 'em out. It's easy!"
"Careful now, Knipe. Be careful."
"I've got a list here sir, of fifty of the most successful writers in the
country, and what I intend to do is offer each one of them a lifetime contract
with pay. All they have to do is undertake never to write another word; and,
of course, to let us use their names on our own stuff. How about that."
"They'll never agree."
"You don't know writers, Mr Bohien. You watch and see."
"What about the creative urge, Knipe?"
"It's bunk! All they're really interested in is the money--just like everybod
y else."
In the end, Mr Bohien reluctantly agreed to give it a try, and Knipe, with
his list of writers in his pocket, went off in a large chauffeur-driven Cadilla
c to make his calls.
He journeyed first to the man at the top of the list, a very great and wo
nderful writer, and he had no trouble getting into the house. He told his sto
ry and produced a suitcase full of sample novels, and a contract for the man
to sign which guaranteed him so much a year for life. The man listened polite
ly, decided he was dealing with a lunatic, gave him a drink, then firmly show
ed him to the door.
The second writer on the list, when he saw Knipe was serious, actually
attacked him with a large metal paper-weight, and the inventor had to flee
down the garden followed by such a torrent of abuse and obscenity as he had
never heard before.
But it took more than this to discourage Adolph Knipe. He was disappoint
ed but not dismayed, and off he went in his big car to seek his next client.
This one was a female, famous and popular, whose fat romantic books sold by
the million across the country. She received Knipe graciously, gave him tea
, and listened attentively to his story.
"It all sounds very fascinating," she said. "But of course I find it a little h

ard to believe."
"Madam," Knipe answered. "Come with me and see it with your own eyes
. My car awaits you."
So off they went, and in due course, the astonished lady was ushered int
o the machine house where the wonder was kept. Eagerly, Knipe explained its
workings, and after a while he even permitted her to sit in the driver's sea
t and practise with the buttons.
"All right," he said suddenly, "you want to do a book now?"
"Oh yes!" she cried. "please!"
She was very competent and seemed to know exactly what she wanted. She
made her own pre-selections, then ran off a long, romantic, passion-filled
novel. She read through the first chapter and became so enthusiastic that s
he signed up on the spot.
"That's one of them out of the way," Knipe said to Mr Bohlen afterwards.
"A pretty big one too."
"Nice work, my boy."
"And you know why she signed?"
"Why?"
"It wasn't the money. She's got plenty of that."
"Then why?"
Knipe grinned, lifting his lip and baring a long pale upper gum. "Simpl
y because she saw the machine-made stuff was better than her own."
Thereafter, Knipe wisely decided to concentrate only upon mediocrity. An
ything better than that--and there were so few it didn't matter much--was ap
parently not quite so easy to seduce.
In the end, after several months of work, he had persuaded something li
ke seventy per cent of the writers on his list to sign the contract. He fou
nd that the older ones, those who were running out of ideas and had taken t
o drink, were the easiest to handle. The younger people were more troubleso
me. They were apt to become abusive, sometimes violent when he approached t
hem; and more than once Knipe was slightly injured on his rounds.
But on the whole, it was a satisfactory beginning. This last year--the f
irst full year of the machine's operation--it was estimated that at least on
e half of all the novels and stories published in the English language were
produced by Adolph Knipe upon the Great Automatic Grammatizator.
Does this surprise you?
I doubt it.
And worse is yet to come. Today, as the secret spreads, many more are hu
rrying to tie up with Mr Knipe. And all the time the screw turns tighter for
those who hesitate to sign their names.
This very moment, as I sit here listening to the howling of my nine starv
ing children in the other room, I can feel my own hand creeping closer and cl

oser to that golden contract that lies over on the other side of the desk.
Give us strength, Oh Lord, to let our children starve.

Claud's Dog
THE RAT CATCHER
IN the afternoon the ratcatcher came to the filling station. He came sidling
up the driveway with a stealthy, soft-treading gait, making no noise at all
with his feet on the gravel. He had an army knapsack slung over one shoulde
r and he was wearing an old-fashioned black jacket with large pockets. His b
rown corduroy trousers were tied around the knees with pieces of white strin
g.
"Yes?" Claud asked, knowing very well who he was.
"Rodent operative." His small dark eyes moved swiftly over the premises.
"The ratcatcher?"
"That's me."
The man was lean and brown with a sharp face and two long sulphur-colou
red teeth that protruded from the upper jaw, overlapping the lower lip, pre
ssing it inward. The ears were thin and pointed and set far back on the hea
d, near the nape of the neck. The eyes were almost black, but when they loo
ked at you there was a flash of yellow somewhere inside them.
"You've come very quick."
"Special orders from the Health Office."
"And now you're going to catch all the rats?"
"Yep."
The kind of dark furtive eyes he had were those of an animal that lives it
s life peering out cautiously and forever from a hole in the ground.
"How are you going to catch 'em?"
"Ah-h-h," the ratman said darkly. "That's all accordin' to where they is."
"Trap 'em, I suppose."
"Trap 'em!" he cried, disgusted. "You won't catch many rats that way! Rat
s isn't rabbits, you know."
He held his face up high, sniffing the air with a nose that twitched percept
ibly from side to side.
"No," he said, scornfully. "Trappin's no way to catch a rat. Rats is cleve
r, let me tell you that. If you want to catch 'em, you got to know 'em. You go
t to know rats on this job."

I could see Claud staring at him with a certain fascination.
"They're more clever'n dogs, rats is."
"Get away."
"You know what they do? They watch you! All the time you're goin' round
preparin' to catch 'em, they're sittin' quietly in dark places, watchin' you
." The man crouched, stretching his stringy neck far forward.
"So what do you do?" Claud asked, fascinated.
"Ah! That's it, you see. That's where you got to know rats."
"How d'you catch 'em?"
"There's ways," the ratman said, leering. "There's various ways." He pause
d, nodding his repulsive head sagely up and down. "It's all dependin'," he sai
d, "on where they is. This ain't a sewer job, is it?"
"No, it's not a sewer job."
"Tricky things, sewer jobs. Yes," he said, delicately sniffing the air to t
he left of him with his mobile nose-end, "sewer jobs is very tricky things."
"Not especially, I shouldn't think."
"Oh-ho. You shouldn't, shouldn't you! Well, I'd like to see you do a sewe
r job! Just exactly how would you set about it, I'd like to know?"
"Nothing to it. I'd just poison 'em, that's all."
"And where exactly would you put the poison, might I ask?"
"Down the sewer. Where the hell you think I put it!"
"There!" the ratman cried, triumphant. "I knew it! Down the sewer! And
you know what'd happen then? Get washed away, that's all. Sewer's like a ri
ver, y'know."
"That's what you say," Claud answered. "That's only what you say."
"It's facts."
"All right, then, all right. So what would you do, Mr Know-all?"
"That's exactly where you got to know rats, on a sewer job."
"Come on then, let's have it."
"Now listen. I'll tell you." The ratman advanced a step closer, his voi
ce became secretive and confidential, the voice of a man divulging fabulous
professional secrets. "You works on the understandin' that a rat is a gnaw
in' animal, see. Rats gnaws. Anythin' you give 'em, don't matter what it is
, anythin' new they never seen before, and what do they do? They gnaws it.
So now! There you are! You get a sewer job on your hands. And what d'you do?"
His voice had the soft throaty sound of a croaking frog and he seemed t
o speak all his words with an immense wet-lipped relish, as though they tas
ted good on the tongue. The accent was similar to Claud's, the broad soft a
ccent of the Buckinghamshire countryside, but his voice was more throaty, t
he words more fruity in his mouth.
"All you do is you go down the sewer and you take along some ordinary p
aper bags, just ordinary brown paper bags, and these bags is filled with pl

aster of Paris powder. Nothin' else. Then you suspend the bags from the roo
f of the sewer so they hang down not quite touchin' the water. See? Not qui
te touchin', and just high enough so a rat can reach 'em."
Claud was listening, rapt.
"There you are, y'see. Old rat comes swimmin' along the sewer and sees t
he bag. He stops. He takes a sniff at it and it don't smell so bad anyway. S
o what's he do then?"
"He gnaws it," Claud cried, delighted.
"There! That's it! That's exactly it! He starts gnawin' away at the bag an
d the bag breaks and the old rat gets a mouthful of powder for his pains."
"Well?"
"That does him."
"What? Kills him?"
"Yep. Kills him stony!"
"Plaster of Paris ain't poisonous, you know."
"Ah! There you are! That's exactly where you're wrong, see. This powder s
wells. When you wet it, it swells. Gets into the rat's tubes and swells right
up and kills him quicker'n anythin' in the world."
"That's where you got to know rats."
The ratman's face glowed with a stealthy pride, and he rubbed his stringy
fingers together, holding the hands up close to the face. Claud watched him,
fascinated.
"Now--where's them rats?" The word 'rats' came out of his mouth soft and
throaty, with a rich fruity relish as though he were gargling with melted but
ter. "Let's take a look at them rraats."
"Over there in the hayrick across the road."
"Not in the house?" he asked, obviously disappointed.
"No. Only around the hayrick. Nowhere else."
"I'll wager they're in the house too. Like as not gettin' in all your food
in the night and spreadin' disease and sickness. You got any disease here?" he
asked, looking first at me, then at Claud.
"Everyone fine here."
"Quite sure?"
"Oh yes."
"You never know, you see. You could be sickenin' for it weeks and weeks
and not feel it. Then all of a sudden--bang!--and it's got you. That's why D
r Arbuthnot's so particular. That's why he sent me out so quick, see. To sto
p the spreadin' of disease."
He had now taken upon himself the mantle of the Health Officer. A most
important rat he was now, deeply disappointed that we were not suffering
from bubonic plague.
"I feel fine," Claud said, nervously.

The ratman searched his face again, but said nothing.
"And how are you goin' to catch 'em in the hayrick?"
The ratman grinned, a crafty toothy grin. He reached down into his knaps
ack and withdrew a large tin which he held up level with his face. He peered
around one side of it at Claud.
"Poison!" he whispered. But he pronounced it pye-zn, making it into a s
oft, dark, dangerous word. "Deadly pye-zn, that's what this is!" He was wei
ghing the tin up and down in his hands as he spoke. "Enough here to kill a
million men!"
"Terrifying," Claud said.
"Exactly it! They'd put you inside for six months if they caught you with
even a spoonful of this," he said, wetting his lips with his tongue. He had
a habit of craning his head forward on his neck as he spoke.
"Want to see?" he asked, taking a penny from his pocket, prising open the
lid. "There now! There it is!" He spoke fondly, almost lovingly of the stuff
, and he held it forward for Claud to look.
"Corn? Or barley is it?"
"It's oats. Soaked in deadly pye-zn. You take just one of them grains in
your mouth and you'd be a gonner in five minutes."
"Honest?"
"Yep. Never out of me sight, this tin."
He caressed it with his hands and gave it a little shake so that the oat grain
s rustled softly inside.
"But not today. Your rats don't get this today. They wouldn't have it anyw
ay. That they wouldn't. There's where you got to know rats. Rats is suspicious
. Terrible suspicious, rats is. So today they gets some nice clean tasty oats
as'll do 'em no harm in the world. Fatten 'em, that's all it'll do. And tomorr
ow they gets the same again. And it'll taste so good there'll be all the rats
in the districk comin' along after a couple of days."
"Rather clever."
"You got to be clever on this job. You got to be cleverer'n a rat and that's
sayin' something."
"You've almost got to be a rat yourself," I said. It slipped out in error,
before I had time to Stop myself, and I couldn't really help it because I was l
ooking at the man at the time. But the effect upon him was surprising.
"There!" he cried. "Now you got it! Now you really said something! A good
ratter's got to be more like a rat than anythin' else in the world! Cleverer e
ven than a rat, and that's not an easy thing to be, let me tell you!"
"Quite sure it's not."
"All right, then let's go. I haven't got all day, you know. There's Lady
Leonora Benson asking for me urgent up there at the Manor."
"She got rats, too?"

"Everybody's got rats," the ratman said, and he ambled off down the dri
veway, across the road to the hayrick and we watched him go. The way he wal
ked was so like a rat it made you wonder--that slow, almost delicate amblin
g walk with a lot of give at the knees and no sound at all from the footste
ps on the gravel. He hopped nimbly over the gate into the field, then walke
d quickly round the hayrick scattering handfuls of oats on to the ground.
The next day he returned and repeated the procedure.
The day after that he came again and this time he put down the poisoned oat
s. But he didn't scatter these; he placed them carefully in little piles at eac
h corner of the rick.
"You got a dog?" he asked when he came back across the road on the thir
d day after putting down the poison.
"Yes."
"Now if you want to see your dog die an 'orrible twistin' death, all you go
t to do is let him in that gate some time."
"We'll take care," Claud told him. "Don't you worry about that."
The next day he returned once more, this time to collect the dead.
"You got an old sack?" he asked. "Most likely we goin' to need a sack to p
ut 'em in."
He was puffed up and important now, the black eyes gleaming with pride.
He was about to display the sensational results of his catch to the audience
.
Claud fetched a sack and the three of us walked across the road, the ratm
an leading. Claud and I leaned over the gate, watching. The ratman prowled ar
ound the hayrick, bending over to inspect his little piles of poison.
"Somethin' wrong here," he muttered. His voice was soft and angry.
He ambled over to another pile and got down on his knees to examine it c
losely.
"Somethin' bloody wrong here."
"What's the matter?"
He didn't answer, but it was clear that the rats hadn't touched his bait.
"These are very clever rats here," I said.
"Exactly what I told him, Gordon. These aren't just no ordinary kind of ra
ts you're dealing with here."
The ratman walked over to the gate. He was very annoyed and showed it o
n his face and around the nose and by the way the two yellow teeth were pre
ssing down into the skin of his lower lip. "Don't give me that crap," he sa
id, looking at me. "There's nothing wrong with these rats except somebody's
feedin'
'em. They got somethin' juicy to eat somewhere and plenty of it. There's no
rats in the world'll turn down oats unless their bellies is full to burstin'."
"They're clever," Claud said.

The man turned away, disgusted. He knelt down again and began to scoop
up the poisoned oats with a small shovel, tipping them carefully back into
the tin. When he had done, all three of us walked back across the road.
The ratman stood near the petrol-pumps, a rather sorry, humble ratman no
w whose face was beginning to take on a brooding aspect. He had withdrawn in
to himself and was brooding in silence over his failure, the eyes veiled and
wicked, the little tongue darting out to one side of the two yellow teeth,
keeping the lips moist. It appeared to be essential that the lips should be
kept moist. He looked up at me, a quick surreptitious glance, then over at C
laud. His nose-end twitched, sniffing the air. He raised himself up and down
a few times on his toes, swaying gently, and in a voice soft and secretive,
he said: "Want to see somethin'?" He was obviously trying to retrieve his r
eputation.
"What?"
"Want to see somethin' amazin'?" As he said this he put his right hand int
o the deep poacher's pocket of his jacket and brought out a large live rat cla
sped tight between his fingers.
"Good God!"
"Ah! That's it, y'see!" He was crouching slightly now and craning his nec
k forward and leering at us and holding this enormous brown rat in his hands,
one finger and thumb making a tight circle around the creature's neck, clamp
ing its head rigid so it couldn't turn and bite.
"D'you usually carry rats around in your pockets?"
"Always got a rat or two about me somewhere." With that he put his free
hand into the other pocket and produced a small white ferret.
"Ferret," he said, holding it up by the neck.
The ferret seemed to know him and stayed still in his grasp.
"There's nothin'll kill a rat quicker'n a ferret. And there's nothin' a rat's m
ore frightened of either."
He brought his hands close together in front of him so that the ferret's no
se was within six inches of the rat's face. The pink beady eyes of the ferret s
tared at the rat. The rat struggled, trying to edge away from the killer.
"Now," he said. "Watch!"
His khaki shirt was open at the neck and he lifted the rat and slipped it
down inside his shirt, next to his skin. As soon as his hand was free, he unbu
ttoned his jacket at the front so that the audience could see the bulge the bo
dy of the rat made under his shirt. His belt prevented it from going down lowe
r than his waist.
Then he slipped the ferret in after the rat.
Immediately there was a great commotion inside the shirt. It appeared tha
t the rat was running around the man's body, being chased by the ferret. Six
or seven times they went around, the small bulge chasing the larger one, gain

ing on it slightly each circuit and drawing closer and closer until at last t
he two bulges seemed to come together and there was a scuffle and a series of
shrill shrieks.
Throughout this performance the ratman had stood absolutely still with l
egs apart, arms hanging loosely, the dark eyes resting on Claud's face. Now
he reached one hand down into his shirt and pulled out the ferret; with the
other he took out the dead rat. There were traces of blood around the white
muzzle of the ferret.
"Not sure I liked that very much."
"You never seen anythin' like it before, I'll bet you that."
"Can't really say I have."
"Like as not you'll get yourself a nasty little nip in the guts one of th
ese days," Claud told him. But he was clearly impressed, and the ratman was b
ecoming cocky again.
"Want to see somethin' far more amazn'n that?" he asked. "You want to s
ee somethin' you'd never even believe unless you seen it with your own eyes
?"
"Well?"
We were standing in the driveway out in front of the pumps and it was
one of those pleasant warm November mornings. Two cars pulled in for petro
l, one right after the other, and Claud went over and gave them what they
wanted.
"You want to see?" the ratman asked.
I glanced at Claud, slightly apprehensive. "Yes," Claud said. "Come on the
n, let's see."
The ratman slipped the dead rat back into one pocket, the ferret into the
other. Then he reached down into his knapsack and produced--if you please--a
second live rat.
"Good Christ!" Claud said.
"Always got one or two rats about me somewhere," the man announced calm
ly. "You got to know rats on this job, and if you want to know 'em you got
to have 'em round you. This is a sewer rat, this is. An old sewer rat, clev
er as buggery. See him watchin' me all the time, wonderin' what I'm goin' t
o do? See him?"
"Very unpleasant."
"What are you going to do?" I asked. I had a feeling I was going to like th
is one even less than the last.
"Fetch me a piece of string."
Claud fetched him a piece of string.
With his left hand, the man looped the string around one of the rat's hind
legs. The rat struggled, trying to turn its head to see what was going on, bu
t he held it tight around the neck with finger and thumb.

"Now!" he said, looking about him. "You got a table inside?"
"We don't want the rat inside the house," I said.
"Well--I need a table. Or somethin' flat like a table."
"What about the bonnet of that car?" Claud said.
We walked over to the car and the man put the old sewer rat on the bonnet
. He attached the string to the windshield wiper so that the rat was now teth
ered.
At first it crouched, unmoving and suspicious, a big-bodied grey rat wit
h bright black eyes and a scaly tail that lay in a long curl upon the car's
bonnet. It was looking away from the ratman, but watching him sideways to se
e what he was going to do. The man stepped back a few paces and immediately
the rat relaxed. It sat up on its haunches and began to lick the grey fur on
its chest. Then it scratched its muzzle with both front paws. It seemed qui
te unconcerned about the three men standing near by.
"Now--how about a little bet?" the ratman asked.
"We don't bet," I said.
"Just for fun. It's more fun if you bet."
"What d'you want to bet on?"
"I'll bet you I can kill that rat without usin' my hands. I'll put my hands
in my pockets and not use 'em."
"You'll kick it with your feet," Claud said.
It was apparent that the ratman was out to earn some money. I looked at t
he rat that was going to be killed and began to feel slightly sick, not so mu
ch because it was going to be killed but because it was going to be killed in
a special way, with a considerable degree of relish.
"No," the ratman said. "No feet."
"Nor arms?" Claud asked.
"Nor arms. Nor legs, nor hands neither."
"You'll sit on it."
"No. No squashin'."
"Let's see you do it."
"You bet me first. Bet me a quid."
"Don't be so bloody daft," Claud said. "Why should we give you a quid?"
"What'll you bet?"
"Nothin'."
"All right. Then it's no go."
He made as if to untie the string from the windshield wiper.
"I'll bet you a shilling," Claud told him. The sick gastric sensation i
n my stomach was increasing, but there was an awful magnetism about this bu
siness and I found myself quite unable to walk away or even move.
"You too?"

"No," I said.
"What's the matter with you?" the ratman asked.
"I just don't want to bet you, that's all."
"So you want me to do this for a lousy shillin'?"
"I don't want you to do it."
"Where's the money?" he said to Claud.
Claud put a shilling piece on the bonnet, near the radiator. The ratman p
roduced two sixpences and laid them beside Claud's money. As he stretched out
his hand to do this, the rat cringed, drawing its head back and flattening i
tself against the bonnet.
"Bet's on," the ratman said.
Claud and I stepped back a few paces. The ratman stepped forward. He put
his hands in his pockets and inclined his body from the waist so that his f
ace was on a level with the rat, about three feet away.
His eyes caught the eyes of the rat and held them. The rat was crouching,
very tense, sensing extreme danger, but not yet frightened. The way it crouc
hed, it seemed to me it was preparing to spring forward at the man's face; bu
t there must have been some power in the ratman's eyes that prevented it from
doing this, and subdued it, and then gradually frightened it so that it bega
n to back away, dragging its body backwards with slow crouching steps until t
he string tautened on its hind leg. It tried to struggle back further against
the string, jerking its leg to free it. The man leaned forward towards the r
at, following it with his face, watching it all the time with his eyes, and s
uddenly the rat panicked and leaped sideways in the air. The string pulled it
up with a jerk that must almost have dislocated its leg.
It crouched again, in the middle of the bonnet, as far away as the string
would allow, and it was properly frightened now, whiskers quivering, the lon
g grey body tense with fear.
At this point, the ratman again began to move his face closer. Very slow
ly he did it, so slowly there wasn't really any movement to be seen at all e
xcept that the face just happened to be a fraction closer each time you look
ed. He never took his eyes from the rat. The tension was considerable and I
wanted suddenly to cry out and tell him to stop. I wanted him to stop becaus
e it was making me feel sick inside, but I couldn't bring myself to say the
word. Something extremely unpleasant was about to happen I was sure of that.
Something sinister and cruel and ratlike, and perhaps it really would make
me sick. But I had to see it now.
The ratman's face was about eighteen inches from the rat. Twelve inches.
Then ten, or perhaps it was eight, and then there was not more than the len
gth of a man's hand separating their faces. The rat was pressing its body fl
at against the car bonnet, tense and terrified. The ratman was also tense, b
ut with a dangerous active tensity that was like a tight-wound spring. The s

hadow of a smile flickered around the skin of his mouth.
Then suddenly he struck.
He struck as a snake strikes, darting his head forward with one swift k
nifelike stroke that originated in the muscles of the lower body, and I had
a momentary glimpse of his mouth opening very wide and two yellow teeth an
d the whole face contorted by the effort of mouth-opening.
More than that I did not care to see. I closed my eyes, and when I opene
d them again the rat was dead and the ratman was slipping the money into his
pocket and spitting to clear his mouth.
"That's what they makes lickerish out of," he said. "Rat's blood is what t
he big factories and the chocolate-people use to make lickerish."
Again the relish, the wet-lipped, lip-smacking relish as he spoke the wor
ds, the throaty richness of his voice and the thick syrupy way he pronounced
the word lickerish.
"No," he said, "there's nothin' wrong with a drop of rat's blood."
"Don't talk so absolutely disgusting," Claud told him.
"Ah! But that's it, you see. You eaten it many a time. Penny sticks and lic
kerish bootlaces is all made from rat's blood."
"We don't want to hear about it, thank you."
"Boiled up, it is, in great cauldrons, bubblin' and steamin' and men stirri
n' it with long poles. That's one of the big secrets of the chocolate-makin' fa
ctories, and no one knows about it--no one except the ratters supplyin' the stu
ff."
Suddenly he noticed that his audience was no longer with him, that our
faces were hostile and sick-looking and crimson with anger and disgust. He
stopped abruptly, and without another word he turned and sloped off down th
e driveway out on to the road, moving with the slow, that almost delicate a
mbling walk that was like a rat prowling, making no noise with his footstep
s even on the gravel of the driveway.

RUMMINS
The sun was up over the hills now and the mist had cleared and it was wonde
rful to be striding along the road with the dog in the early morning, espec
ially when it was autumn, with the leaves changing to gold and yellow and s
ometimes one of them breaking away and falling slowly, turning slowly over
in the air, dropping noiselessly right in front of him on to the grass besi
de the road. There was a small wind up above, and he could hear the beeches
rustling and murmuring like a crowd of people.
This was always the best time of the day for Claud Cubbage. He gazed app

rovingly at the rippling velvety hindquarters of the greyhound trotting in f
ront of him.
"Jackie," he called softly. "Hey, Jackson. How you feeling, boy?"
The dog half turned at the sound of its name and gave a quick acknowledg
ing wag of the tail.
There would never be another dog like this Jackie, he told himself. How
beautiful the slim streamlining, the small pointed head, the yellow eyes, th
e black mobile nose. Beautiful the long neck, the way the deep brisket curve
d back and up out of sight into no stomach at all. See how he walked upon hi
s toes, noiselessly, hardly touching the surface of the road at all.
"Jackson," he said. "Good old Jackson."
In the distance, Claud could see Rummins' farmhouse, small, narrow, and
ancient, standing back behind the hedge on the right-hand side.
I'll turn round there, he decided. That'll be enough for today.
Rummins, carrying a pail of milk across the yard, saw him coming down
the road. He set the pail down slowly and came forward to the gate, leanin
g both arms on the topmost bar, waiting.
"Morning, Mr Rummins," Claud said. It was necessary to be polite to R
ummins because of eggs.
Rummins nodded and leaned over the gate, looking critically at the dog.
"Looks well," he said.
"He is well."
"When's he running?"
"I don't know, Mr Rummins."
"Come on. When's he running?"
"He's only ten months yet, Mr Rummins. He's not even schooled properly,
honest."
The small beady eyes of Rummins peered suspiciously over the top of the
gate. "I wouldn't mind betting a couple of quid you're having it off with
him somewhere secret soon."
Claud moved his feet uncomfortably on the black road surface. He dislike
d very much this man with the wide frog mouth, the broken teeth, the shifty
eyes; and most of all he disliked having to be polite to him because of eggs
.
"That hayrick of yours opposite," he said, searching desperately for another
subject. "It's full of rats."
"All hayricks got rats."
"Not like this one. Matter of fact we've been having a touch of trouble wit
h the authorities about that."
Rummins glanced up sharply. He didn't like trouble with the authorities.
Any man who sells eggs blackmarket and kills pigs without a permit is wise
to avoid contact with that sort of people.

"What kind of trouble?"
"They sent the ratcatcher along."
"You mean just for a few rats?"
"A few! Blimey, it's swarming!"
"Never."
"Honest it is, Mr Rummins. There's hundreds of 'em."
"Didn't the ratcatcher catch 'em?"
"No.
"Why?"
"I reckon they're too artful."
Rummins began thoughtfully to explore the inner rim of one nostril with
the end of his thumb, holding the noseflap between thumb and finger as he
did so.
"I wouldn't give thank you for no ratcatchers," he said. "Ratcatchers i
s government men working for the soddin' government and I wouldn't give tha
nk you for 'em."
"Nor me, Mr Rummins. All ratcatchers is slimy cunning creatures."
"Well," Rummins said, sliding fingers under his cap to scratch the head
, "I was coming over soon anyway to fetch in that rick. Reckon I might just
as well do it today as any other time. I don't want no government men nosi
ng around my stuff thank you very much."
"Exactly, Mr Rummins."
"We'll be over later--Bert and me." With that he turned and ambled off ac
ross the yard.
Around three in the afternoon, Rummins and Bert were seen riding slowly
up the road in a cart drawn by a ponderous and magnificent black carthorse.
Opposite the filling-station the cart turned off into the field and stopped
near the hayrick.
"This ought to be worth seeing," I said. "Get the gun."
C laud fetched the rifle and slipped a cartridge into the breech.
I strolled across the road and leaned against the open gate. Rummins was
on the top of the rick now and cutting away at the cord that bound the thatch
ing. Bert remained in the cart, fingering the four-foot-long knife.
Bert had something wrong with one eye. It was pale grey all over, like a
boiled fish-eye, and although it was motionless in its socket it appeared a
lways to be looking at you and following you round the way the eyes of the p
eople in some of those portraits do, in the museums. Wherever you stood and
wherever Bert was looking, there was this faulty eye fixing you sideways wit
h a cold stare, boiled and misty pale with a little black dot in the centre,
like a fish-eye on a plate.
In his build he was the opposite of his father who was short and squat lik
e a frog. Bert was a tall, reedy, boneless boy, loose at the joints, even the

head loose upon the shoulders, falling sideways as though perhaps it was too h
eavy for the neck.
"You only made this rick last June," I said to him. "Why take it away so
soon?
"Dad wants it."
"Funny time to cut a new rick, November."
"Dad wants it," Bert repeated, and both his eyes, the sound one and the o
ther stared down at me with a look of absolute vacuity.
"Going to all that trouble stacking it and thatching it and then pulling it
down five months later."
"Dad wants it." Bert's nose was running and he kept wiping it with the ba
ck of his hand and wiping the back of the hand on his trousers.
"Come on, Bert," Rummins called, and the boy climbed up on to the rick
and stood in the place where the thatch had been removed. He took the kni
fe and began to cut down into the tight-packed hay with an easy-swinging,
sawing movement, holding the handle with both hands and rocking his body l
ike a man sawing wood with a big saw. I could hear the crisp cutting noise
of the blade against the dry hay and the noise becoming softer as the kni
fe sank deeper into the rick.
"Claud's going to take a pot at the rats as they come out."
The man and the boy stopped abruptly and looked across the road at Clau
d who was leaning against the red pump with rifle in hand.
"Tell him to put that bloody rifle away," Rummins said.
"He's a good shot. He won't hit you."
"No one's potting no rats alongside of me, don't matter how good they are
."
"You'll insult him."
"Tell him to put it away," Rummins said, slow and hostile, "I don't mind do
gs nor sticks but I'll be buggered if I'll have rifles."
The two on the hayrick watched while Claud did as he was told, then they
resumed their work in silence. Soon Bert came down into the cart, and reach
ing out with both hands he pulled a slice of solid hay away from the rick so
that it dropped neatly into the cart beside him.
A rat, grey-black, with a long tail, came out of the base of the rick and ra
n into the hedge.
"A rat," I said.
"Kill it," Rummins said. "Why don't you get a stick and kill it?"
The alarm had been given now and the rats were coming out quicker, one
or two of them every minute, fat and long-bodied, crouching close to the gr
ound as they ran through the grass into the hedge. Whenever the horse saw o
ne of them it twitched its ears and followed it with uneasy rolling eyes.
Bert had climbed back on top of the rick and was cutting out another bal

e. Watching him, I saw him suddenly stop, hesitate for perhaps a second, the
n again begin to cut, but very cautiously this time, and now I could hear a
different sound, a muffled rasping noise as the blade of the knife grated ag
ainst something hard.
Bert pulled out the knife and examined the blade, testing it with his th
umb. He put it back, letting it down gingerly into the cut, feeling gently d
ownward until it came again upon the hard object; and once more, when he mad
e another cautious little sawing movement, there came that grating sound.
Rummins turned his head and looked over his shoulder at the boy. He was
in the act of lifting an armful of loosened thatch, bending forward with bot
h hands grasping the straw, but he stopped dead in the middle of what he was
doing and looked at Bert. Bert remained still, hands holding the handle of
the knife, a look of bewilderment on his face. Behind, the sky was a pale cl
ear blue and the two figures up there on the hayrick stood out sharp and bla
ck like an etching against the paleness.
Then Rummins' voice, louder than usual, edged with an unmistakable app
rehension that the loudness did nothing to conceal: "Some of them haymaker
s is too bloody careless what they put on a rick these days."
He paused, and again the silence, the men motionless, and across the ro
ad Claud leaning motionless against the red pump. It was so quiet suddenly
we could hear a woman's voice far down the valley on the next farm calling
the men to food.
Then Rummins again, shouting where there was no need to shout: "Go on, t
hen! Go on an' cut through it, Bert! A little stick of wood won't hurt the s
oddin' knife!"
For some reason, as though perhaps scenting trouble, Claud came stroll
ing across the road and joined me leaning on the gate. He didn't say anyth
ing, but both of us seemed to know that there was something disturbing abo
ut these two men, about the stillness that surrounded them and especially
about Rummins himself. Rummins was frightened. Bert was frightened too. An
d now as I watched them, I became conscious of a small vague image moving
just below the surface of my memory. I tried desperately to reach back and
grasp it. Once I almost touched it, but it slipped away and when I went a
fter it I found myself travelling back and back through many weeks, back i
nto the yellow days of summer--the warm wind blowing down the valley from
the south, the big beech trees heavy with their foliage, the fields turnin
g 'to gold, the harvesting, the haymaking, the rick--the building of the rick.
Instantly I felt a fine electricity of fear running over the skin of my stoma
ch.
Yes--the building of the rick. When was it we had built it? June? That w
as it, of course a hot muggy day in June with the clouds low overhead and th
e air thick with the smell of thunder.

And Rummins had said, "Let's for God's sake get it in quick before the ra
in comes."
And Ole Jimmy had said, "There ain't going to be no rain. And there ain't
no hurry either. You know very well when thunder's in the south it don't cro
ss over into the valley."
Rummins, standing up in the cart handing out the pitch-forks, had not an
swered him. He was in a furious brooding temper because of his anxiety about
getting in the hay before it rained.
"There ain't gin' to be no rain before evening," Ole Jimmy had repeate
d, looking at Rummins; and Rummins had stared back at him, the eyes glimme
ring with a slow anger.
All through the morning we had worked without a pause, loading the hay
into the cart, trundling it across the field, pitching it out on to the slo
wly growing rick that stood over by the gate opposite the filling-station.
We could hear the thunder in the south as it came towards us and moved away
again. Then it seemed to return and remain stationary somewhere beyond the
hills, rumbling intermittently. When we looked up we could see the clouds
overhead moving and changing shape in the turbulence of the upper air, but
on the ground it was hot and muggy and there was no breath of wind. We work
ed slowly, listlessly in the heat, shirts wet with sweat, faces shining.
Claud and I had worked beside Rummins on the rick itself, helping to
shape it, and I could remember how very hot it had been and the flies aro
und my face and the sweat pouring out everywhere; and especially I could
remember the grim scowling presence of Rummins beside me, working with a
desperate urgency and watching the sky and shouting at the men to hurry.
At noon, in spite of Rummins, we had knocked off for lunch.
Claud and I had sat down under the hedge with Ole Jimmy and another ma
n called Wilson who was a soldier home on leave, and it was too hot to do
much talking. Wilson had some bread and cheese and a canteen of cold tea.
Ole Jimmy had a satchel that was an old gas-mask container, and in this, c
losely packed, standing upright with their necks protruding, were six pint
bottles of beer.
"Come on," he said, offering a bottle to each of us.
"I'd like to buy one from you," Claud said, knowing very well the old man
had little money.
"Take it."
"I must pay you."
"Don't be so daft. Drink it."
He was a very good old man, good and clean, with a clean pink face that
he shaved each day. He had used to be a carpenter, but they retired him at t
he age of seventy and that was some years before. Then the Village Council,
seeing him still active, had given him the job of looking after the newly bu

ilt children's playground, of maintaining the swings and see-saws in good re
pair and also of acting as a kind of gentle watchdog, seeing that none of th
e kids hurt themselves or did anything foolish.
That was a fine job for an old man to have and everybody seemed please
d with the way things were going--until a certain Saturday night. That nig
ht Ole Jimmy had got drunk and gone reeling and singing down the middle of
the High Street with such a howling noise that people got out of their be
ds to see what was going on below. The next morning they had sacked him sa
ying he was a waster and a drunkard not fit to associate with young childr
en on the playground.
But then an astonishing thing happened. The first day that he stayed aw
ay--a Monday it was--not one single child came near the playground.
Nor the next day, nor the one after that.
All week the swings and the see-saws and the high slide with steps going
up to it stood deserted. Not a child went near them. Instead they followed
Ole Jimmy out into a field behind the Rectory and played their games there w
ith him watching; and the result of all this was that after a while the Coun
cil had had no alternative but to give the old man back his job.
He still had it now and he still got drunk and no one said anything about
it any more. He left it only for a few days each year, at haymaking time. Al
l his life Ole Jimmy had loved to go haymaking and he wasn't going to give it
up yet.
"You want one?" he asked now, holding a bottle out to Wilson, the soldier
.
"No thanks. I got tea."
"They say tea's good on a hot day."
"It is. Beer makes me sleepy."
"If you like," I said to Ole Jimmy, "we could walk across to the fillingstation and I'll do you a couple of nice sandwiches? Would you like that?"
"Beer's plenty. There's more food in one bottle of beer, me lad, than twe
nty sandwiches."
He smiled at me, showing two rows of palepink, toothless gums, but it
was a pleasant smile and there was nothing repulsive about the way the gum
s showed.
We sat for a while in silence. The soldier finished his bread and cheese
and lay back on the ground, tilting his hat forward over his face. Ole Jimmy
had drunk three bottles of beer, and now he offered the last to Claud and me.
"No thanks."
"No thanks. One's plenty for me."
The old man shrugged, unscrewed the stopper, tilted his head back and dr
ank, pouring the beer into his mouth with the lips held open so the liquid r

an smoothly without gurgling down his throat. He wore a hat that was of no c
olour at all and of no shape, and it did not fall off when he tilted back hi
s head.
"Ain't Rummins goin' to give that old horse a drink?" he asked, lowering t
he bottle, looking across the field at the great carthorse that stood steaming
between the shafts of the cart.
"Not Rummins."
"Horses is thirsty, just the same as us." Ole Jimmy paused, still looking
at the horse. "You got a bucket of water in that place of yours there?"
"Of course."
"No reason why we shouldn't give the old horse a drink then, is there?"
"That's a very good idea. We'll give him a drink."
Claud and I both stood up and began walking towards the gate, and I re
member turning and calling to the old man: "You quite sure you wouldn't li
ke me to bring you a nice sandwich? Won't take a second to make."
He shook his head and waved the bottle at us and said something about tak
ing himself a little nap. We went on through the gate over the road to the fi
lling station.
I suppose we stayed away for about an hour attending to customers and ge
tting ourselves something to eat, and when at length we returned, Claud carr
ying the bucket of water, I noticed that the rick was at least six foot high.
"Some water for the old horse," Claud said, looking hard at Rummins who
was up in the cart pitching hay on to the rick.
The horse put its head in the bucket, sucking and blowing gratefully at th
e water.
"Where's Ole Jimmy?" I asked. We wanted the old man to see the water be
cause it had been his idea.
When I asked the question there was a moment, a brief moment, when Ru
mminS hesitated, pitchfork in mid-air, looking around him.
"I brought him a sandwich," I added. "Bloody old fool drunk too much b
eer and gone off home to sleep," Rummins said.
I strolled along the hedge back to the place where we had been sitting w
ith Ole Jimmy. The five empty bottles were lying there in the grass. So was
the satchel. I picked up the satchel and carried it back to Rummins.
"I don't think Ole Jimmy's gone home, Mr Rummins," I said, holding up
the satchel by the long shoulder-band. Rummins glanced at it but made no r
eply. He was in a frenzy of haste now because the thunder was closer, the
clouds blacker, the heat more oppressive than ever.
Carrying the satchel, I started back to the filling station where I remai
ned for the rest of the afternoon, serving customers. Towards evening, when t
he rain came, I glanced across the road and noticed that they had got the hay
in and were laying a tarpaulin over the rick.

In a few days the thatcher arrived and took the tarpaulin off and made a
roof of straw instead. He was a good thatcher and he made a fine roof with lo
ng straw, thick and well-packed. The slope was nicely angled, the edges clean
ly clipped, and it was a pleasure to look at it from the road or from the doo
r of the filling station.
All this came flooding back to me now as clearly as if it were yesterday
--the building of the rick on that hot thundery day in June, the yellow fiel
d, the sweet woody smell of the hay; and Wilson the soldier, with tennis sho
es on his feet, Bert with the boiled eye, Ole Jimmy with the clean old face,
the pink naked gums; and Rummins, the broad dwarf, standing up in the cart
scowling at the sky because he was anxious about the rain.
At this very moment, there he was again, this Rummins, crouching on top of
the rick with a sheaf of thatch in his arms looking round at the son, the tal
l Bert, motionless also, both of them black like silhouettes against the sky,
and once again I felt the fine electricity of fear as it came and went in litt
le waves over the skin of my stomach.
"Go on and cut through it, Bert," Rummins said, speaking loudly.
Bert put pressure on the big knife and there was a high grating noise as
the edge of the blade sawed across something hard. It was clear from Bert's f
ace that he did not like what he was doing.
It took several minutes before the knife was through--then again at last t
he softer sound of the blade slicing the tight-packed hay and Bert's face turn
ed sideways to the father, grinning with relief, nodding inanely.
"Go on and cut it out," Rummins said, and still he did not move.
Bert made a second vertical cut the same depth as the first; then he got d
own and pulled the bale of hay so it came away cleanly from the rest of the ri
ck like a chunk of cake, dropping into the cart at his feet.
Instantly the boy seemed to freeze, staring stupidly at the newly expos
ed face of the rick, unable to believe or perhaps refusing to believe what
this thing was that he had cut in two. Rummins, who knew very well what it
was, had turned away and was climbing quickly down the other side of the ri
ck. He moved so fast he was through the gate and half-way across the road b
efore Bert started to scream.

MR HODDY
They got out of the car and went in the front door of Mr Hoddy's house.
"I've an idea Dad's going to question you rather sharp tonight," Glance w
hispered.
"About what, Glance?"

"The usual stuff. Jobs and things like that. And whether you can support m
e in a fitting way."
"Jackie's going to do that," Claud said. "When Jackie wins there won't be
any need for any jobs... "Don't you ever mention Jackie to my dad, Claud Cub
bage, or that'll be the end of it. If there's one thing in the world he can't
abide it's greyhounds. Don't you ever forget that."
"Oh Christ," Claud said.
"Tell him something else anything--anything to make him happy, see?" An
d with that she led Claud into the parlour.
Mr Hoddy was a widower, a man with a prim sour mouth and an expression
of eternal disapproval all over his face. He had the small, close-together
teeth of his daughter Glance, the same suspicious, inward look about the ey
es, but none of her freshness and vitality, none of her warmth. He was a sm
all sour apple of a man, grey-skinned and shrivelled, with a dozen or so su
rviving strands of black hair pasted across the dome of his bald head. But
a very superior man was Mr Hoddy, a grocer's assistant, one who wore a spot
less white gown at his work, who handled large quantities of such precious
commodities as butter and sugar, who was deferred to, even smiled at by eve
ry housewife in the village.
Claud Cubbage was never quite at his ease in this house and that was prec
isely as Mr Hoddy intended it. They were sitting round the fire in the parlou
r with cups of tea in their hands, Mr Hoddy in the best chair to the right of
the fireplace, Claud and Glance on the sofa, decorously separated by a wide
space. The younger daughter, Ada, was on a hard upright chair to the left, an
d they made a little circle round the fire, a stiff, tense little circle, pri
mly tea-sipping.
"Yes, Mr Hoddy," Claud was saying, "you can be quite sure both Gordon a
nd me's got quite a number of nice little ideas up our sleeves this very mo
ment. It's only a question of taking our time and making sure which is goin
g to be the most profitable."
"What sort of ideas?" Mr Hoddy asked, fixing Claud with his small, disa
pproving eyes.
"Ah, there you are now. That's it, you see." Claud shifted uncomfortably
on the sofa. His blue lounge suit was tight around his chest, and it was espe
cially tight between his legs, up in the crutch. The tightness in his crutch
was actually painful to him and he wanted terribly to hitch it downward.
"This man you call Gordon, I thought he had a profitable business out t
here as it is," Mr Hoddy said. "Why does he want to change?"
"Absolutely right, Mr Hoddy. It's a firstrate business. But it's a good th
ing to keep expanding, see. New ideas is what we're after. Something I can com
e in on as well and take a share of the profits."
"Such as what?"

Mr Hoddy was eating a slice of currant cake, nibbling it round the edges,
and his small mouth was like the mouth of a caterpillar biting a tiny curved s
lice out of the edge of a leaf.
"Such as what?" he asked again.
"There's long conferences, Mr Hoddy, takes place every day between Gor
don and me about these different matters of business."
"Such as what?" he repeated, relentless.
Glance glanced sideways at Claud, encouraging. Claud turned his large
slow eyes upon Mr Hoddy, and he was silent. He wished Mr Hoddy wouldn't pu
sh him around like this, always shooting questions at him and glaring at h
im and acting just exactly like he was the bloody adjutant or something.
"Such as what?" Mr Hoddy said, and this time Claud knew that he was not
going to let go. Also, his instinct warned him that the old man was trying t
o create a crisis.
"Well now," he said, breathing deep. "I don't really want to go into detai
ls until we got it properly worked out. All we're doing so far is turning our
ideas over in our minds, see."
"All I'm asking," Mr Hoddy said irritably, "is what sort of business are y
ou contemplating? I presume that it's respectable?"
"Now please, Mr Hoddy. You don't for one moment think we'd even so muc
h as consider anything that wasn't absolutely and entirely respectable, do
you?"
Mr Hoddy grunted, stirring his tea slowly, watching Claud. Glance sat mut
e and fearful on the sofa, gazing into the fire.
"I've never been in favour of starting a business," Mr Hoddy pronounced
, defending his own failure in that line. "A good respectable job is all a
man should wish for. A respectable job in respectable surroundings. Too muc
h hokey-pokey in business for my liking."
"The thing is this," Claud said, desperate now. "All I want is to provi
de my wife with everything she can possibly desire. A house to live in and
furniture and a flower garden and a washing-machine and all the best things
in the world. That's what I want to do, and you can't do that on an ordina
ry wage, now can you? It's impossible to get enough money to do that unless
you go into business, Mr Hoddy. You'll surely agree with me there?"
Mr Hoddy, who had worked for an ordinary wage all his life, didn't much
like this point of view.
"And don't you think I provide everything my family wants, might I ask?"
"Oh, yes, and more!" Claud cried fervently. "But you've got a very super
ior job, Mr Hoddy, and that makes all the difference."
"But what sort of business are you thinking of?" the man persisted.
Claud sipped his tea to give himself a little more time and he couldn't h

elp wondering how the miserable old bastard's face would look if he simply up
and told him the truth right there and then, if he'd said what we've got Mr
Hoddy, if you really wants to know, is a couple of greyhounds and one's a per
fect ringer for the other and we're going to bring off the biggest goddam gam
ble in the history of flapping, see. He'd like to watch the old bastard's fac
e if he said that, he really would.
They were all waiting for him to proceed now, sitting there with cups o
f tea in their hands staring at him and waiting for him to say something go
od. "Well," he said, speaking very slowly because he was thinking deep. "I'
ve been pondering something a long time now, something as'll make more mone
y even than Gordon's secondhand cars or anything else come to that, and pra
ctically no expense involved." That's better, he told himself. Keep going a
long like that.
"And what might that be?"
"Something so queer, Mr Hoddy, there isn't one in a million would even be
lieve it."
"Well, what is it?" Mr Hoddy placed his cup carefully on the little tab
le beside him and leaned forward to listen. And Claud, watching him, knew m
ore than ever that this man and all those like him were his enemies. It was
the Mr Hoddys were the trouble. They were all the same. He knew them all,
with their clean ugly hands, their grey skin, their acrid mouths, their ten
dency to develop little round bulging bellies just below the waistcoat; and
always the unctuous curl of the nose, the weak chin, the suspicious eyes t
hat were dark and moved too quick. The Mr Hoddys. Oh, Christ.
"Well, what is it?"
"It's an absolute gold-mine, Mr Hoddy, honestly it is."
"I'll believe that when I hear it."
"It's a thing so simple and amazing most people wouldn't even bother to
do it." He had it now--something he had actually been thinking seriously a
bout for a long time, something he'd always wanted to do. He leaned across
and put his teacup carefully on the table beside Mr Hoddy's, then, not know
ing what to do with his hands, placed them on his knees, palms downward.
"Well, come on man, what is it?"
"It's maggots," Claud answered softly.
Mr Hoddy jerked back as though someone had squirted water in his face.
"Maggots!" he said, aghast. "Maggots? What on earth do you mean, maggots?
" Claud had forgotten that this word was almost unmentionable in any selfr
especting grocer's shop. Ada began to giggle, but Clarice glanced at her s
o malignantly the giggle died on her mouth.
"That's where the money is, starting a maggot factory."
"Are you trying to be funny?"
"Honestly, Mr Hoddy, it may sound a bit queer, and that's simply because y

ou never heard it before, but it's a little gold-mine."
"A maggot-factory! Really now, Cubbage! Please be sensible!"
Glance wished her father wouldn't call him Cubbage.
"You never heard speak of a maggot-factory, Mr Hoddy?"
"I certainly have not!"
"There's maggot-factories going now, real big companies with managers
and directors and all, and you know what, Mr Hoddy? They're making milli
ons!"
"Nonsense, man."
"And you know why they're making millions?" Claud paused, but he did n
ot notice now that his listener's face was slowly turning yellow. "It's be
cause of the enormous demand for maggots, Mr Hoddy."
At that moment Mr Hoddy was listening also to other voices, the voices
of his customers across the counter--Mrs Rabbits, for instance, as he slice
d off her ration of butter, Mrs Rabbits with her brown moustache and always
talking so loud and saying well, well, well; he could hear her now saying
"Well, well, well Mr Hoddy, so your Clarice got married last week, did she.
Very nice too, I must say, and what was it you said her husband does, Mr H
oddy?"
He owns a maggot-factory, Mrs Rabbits.
No, thank you, he told himself, watching Claud with his small, hostile e
yes. No thank you very much indeed. I don't want that.
"I can't say," he announced primly, "that I myself have ever had occasio
n to purchase a maggot."
"Now you come to mention it, Mr Hoddy, nor have I. Nor has many othe
r people we know. But let me ask you something else. How many times you
have occasion to purchase... a crown wheel and pinion, for instance?"
This was a shrewd question and Claud permitted himself a slow mawkish
smile.
"What's that got to do with maggots?"
"Exactly this--that certain people buy certain things, see. You never bou
ght a crown wheel and pinion in your life, but that don't say there isn't men
getting rich this very moment making them--because there is. It's the same w
ith maggots!"
"Would you mind telling me who these unpleasant people are who buy m
aggots?"
"Maggots are bought by fishermen, Mr Hoddy. Amateur fishermen. There's
thousands and thousands of fishermen all over the country going out every
week-end fishing the rivers and all of them wanting maggots. Willing to p
ay good money for them, too. You go along the river there anywhere you lik
e above Marlow on a Sunday and you'll see them lining the banks. Sitting t
here one beside the other simply lining the banks of both sides."

"Those men don't buy maggots. They go down the bottom of the garden
and dig worms."
"Now that's just where you're wrong, Mr Hoddy, if you'll allow me to sa
y so. That's just where you're absolutely wrong. They want maggots, not wor
ms."
"In that case they get their own maggots."
"They don't want to get their own maggots. Just imagine Mr Hoddy, it's S
aturday afternoon and you're going out fishing and a nice clean tin of maggo
ts arrives by post and all you've got to do is slip it in the fishing bag an
d away you go. You don't think fellers is going out digging for worms and hu
nting for maggots when they can have them delivered right to their very door
steps like that just for a bob or two, do you?"
"And might I ask how you propose to run this maggot-factory of yours?"
When he spoke the word maggot, it seemed as if he were spitting out a sour
little pip from his mouth.
"Easiest thing in the world to run a maggotfactory." Claud was gaining c
onfidence now and warming to his subject. "All you need is a couple of old o
il drums and a few lumps of rotten meat or a sheep's head, and you put them
in the oil drums and that's all you do. The flies do the rest."
Had he been watching Mr Hoddy's face he would probably have stopped t
here.
"Of course, it's not quite as easy as it sounds. What you've got to do ne
xt is feed up your maggots with special diet. Bran and milk. And then when th
ey get big and fat you put them in pint tins and post them off to your custom
ers. Five shillings a pint they fetch. Five shillings a pint!" he cried, slap
ping the knee. "You just imagine that, Mr Hoddy! And they say one bluebottle'
!! lay twenty pints easy!"
He paused again, but merely to marshal his thoughts, for there was no
stopping him now. "And there's another thing, Mr Hoddy. A good maggot-fact
ory don't just breed ordinary maggots, you know. Every fisherman's got his
own tastes. Maggots are commonest, but also there's lug worms. Some fishe
rmen won't have nothing but lug worms. And of course there's coloured magg
ots. Ordinary maggots are white, but you get them all sorts of different c
olours by feeding them special foods, see. Red ones and green ones and bla
ck ones and you can even get blue ones if you know what to feed them. The
most difficult thing of all in a maggot-factory is a blue maggot, Mr Hoddy
."
Claud stopped to catch his breath. He was having a vision now--the sam
e vision that accompanied all his dreams of wealth--of an immense factory
building with tall chimneys and hundreds of happy workers streaming in thr
ough the wide wrought-iron gates and Claud himself sitting in his luxuriou
s office directing operations with a calm and splendid assurance.

"There's people with brains studying these things this very minute," he w
ent on. "So you got to jump in quick unless you want to get left out in the c
old. That's the secret of big business, jumping in quick before all the other
s, Mr Hoddy."
Glance, Ada, and the father sat absolutely still looking straight ahead.
None of them moved or spoke. Only Claud rushed on.
"Just so long as you make sure your maggots is alive when you post 'em.
They've got to be wiggling, see. Maggots is no good unless they're wiggling.
And when we really get going, when we've built up a little capital, then we
'll put up some glasshouses."
Another pause, and Claud stroked his chin. "Now I expect you're all wonde
ring why a person should want glasshouses in a maggotfactory. Well--I'll tell
you. It's for the flies in the winter, see. Most important to take care of y
our flies in the winter."
"I think that's enough, thank you, Cubbage," Mr Hoddy said suddenly.
Claud looked up and for the first time he saw the expression on the man's
face. It stopped him cold.
"I don't want to hear any more about it," Mr Hoddy said.
"All I'm trying to do, Mr Hoddy," Claud cried, "is give your little girl e
verything she can possibly desire. That's all I'm thinking of night and day, M
r Hoddy."
"Then all I hope is you'll be able to do it without the help of maggots."
"Dad!" Glance cried, alarmed. "I simply won't have you talking to Claud l
ike that."
"I'll talk to him how I wish, thank you Miss."
"I think it's time I was getting along," Claud saidd. "Good night."

MR FEASEY
We were both up early when the big day came.
I wandered into the kitchen for a shave, but Claud got dressed right awa
y and went outside to arrange about the straw. The kitchen was a front room
and through the window I could see the sun just coming up behind the line of
trees on top of the ridge the other side of the valley.
Each time Claud came past the window with an armload of straw I noticed
over the rim of the mirror the intent, breathless expression on his face, th
e great round bullet-head thrusting forward and the forehead wrinkled into d
eep corrugations right up to the hairline. I'd only seen this look on him on
ce before and that was the evening he'd asked Glance to marry him. Today he
was so excited he even walked funny, treading softly as though the concrete

around the filling-station were a shade too hot for the soles of his feet; a
nd he kept packing more and more straw into the back of the van to make it c
omfortable for Jackie.
Then he came into the kitchen to get breakfast, and I watched him put th
e pot of soup on the stove and begin stirring it. He had a long metal spoon
and he kept on stirring and stirring all the time it was coming to the boil,
and about every half minute he leaned forward and stuck his nose into that
sickly-sweet steam of cooking horseflesh. Then he started putting extras int
o it three peeled onions, a few young carrots, a cupful of stinging-nettle t
ops, a teaspoon of Valentines Meat Juice, twelve drops of cod-liver oil--and
everything he touched was handled very gently with the ends of his big fat
fingers as though it might have been a little fragment of Venetian glass. He
took some minced horsemeat from the icebox, measured one handful into Jacki
e's bowl, three into the other, and when the soup was ready he shared it out
between the two, pouring it over the meat.
It was the same ceremony I'd seen performed each morning for the past f
ive months, but never with such intense and breathless concentration as thi
s. There was no talk, not even a glance my way, and when he turned and went
out again to fetch the dogs, even the back of his neck and the shoulders s
eemed to be whispering, 'Oh, Jesus, don't let anything go wrong, and especi
ally don't let me do anything wrong today.'
I heard him talking softly to the dogs in the pen as he put the leashes o
n them, and when he brought them around into the kitchen, they came in pranci
ng and pulling to get at the breakfast, treading up and down with their front
feet and waving their enormous tails from side to side, like whips.
"All right," Claud said, speaking at last. "Which is it?"
Most mornings he'd offer to bet me a pack of cigarettes, but there were b
igger things at stake today and I knew all he wanted for the moment was a lit
tle extra reassurance.
He watched me as I walked once around the two beautiful, identical, tall
, velvety-black dogs, and he moved aside, holding the leashes at arms' lengt
h to give me a better view.
"Jackie!" I said, trying the old trick that never worked. "Hey, Jackie!"
Two identical heads with identical expressions flicked around to look at me
, four bright, identical, deep-yellow eyes stared into mine. There'd been a
time when I fancied the eyes of one were slightly darker yellow than those o
f the other. There'd also been a time when I thought I could recognize Jacki
e because of a deeper brisket and a shade more muscle on the hindquarters. B
ut it wasn't so.
"Come on," Claud said. He was hoping that today of all days I would mak
e a bad guess.
"This one," I said. "This is Jackie."

"Which?"
"This one on the left."
"There!" he cried, his whole face suddenly beaming. "You're wrong again
!"
"I don't think I'm wrong."
"You're about as wrong as you could possibly be. And now listen, Gordon
, and I'll tell you something. All these last weeks, every morning while yo
u've been trying to pick him out--you know what?"
"What?"
"I've been keeping count. And the result is you haven't been right even o
ne-half the time! You'd have done better tossing a coin!"
What he meant was that if I (who saw them every day and side by side) c
ouldn't do it, why the hell should we be frightened of Mr Feasey? Claud kne
w Mr Feasey was famous for spotting ringers, but he knew also that it could
be very difficult to tell the difference between two dogs when there wasn'
t any.
He put the bowls of food on the floor, giving Jackie the one with the l
east meat because he was running today. When he stood back to watch them ea
t, the shadow of deep concern was back again on his face and the large pale
eyes were staring at Jackie with the same rapt and melting look of love th
at up till recently had been reserved only for Glance.
"You see, Gordon," he said. "It's just what I've always told you. For the
last hundred years there's been all manner of ringers, some good and some ba
d, but in the whole history of dogracing there's never been a ringer like thi
s."
"I hope you're right," I said, and my mind began travelling back to tha
t freezing afternoon just before Christmas, four months ago, when Claud had
asked to borrow the van and had driven away in the direction of Aylesbury
without saying where he was going. I had assumed he was off to see Glance,
but late in the afternoon he had returned bringing with him this dog he sai
d he'd bought off a man for thirty-five shillings.
"Is he fast?" I had said. We were standing out by the pumps and Claud wa
s holding the dog on a leash and looking at him, and a few snowflakes were f
alling and settling on the dog's back. The motor of the van was still runnin
g.
"Fast!" Claud had said. "He's just about the slowest dog you ever saw in
your whole life!"
"Then what you buy him for?"
"Well," he had said, the big bovine face secret and cunning, "it occurred
to me that maybe he might possibly look a little bit like Jackie. What d'you t
hink?"
"I suppose he does a bit, now you come to mention it."

He had handed me the leash and I had taken the new dog inside to dry h
im off while Claud had gone round to the pen to fetch his beloved. And whe
n he returned and we put the two of them together for the first time, I ca
n remember him stepping back and saying, "Oh, Jesus!" and standing dead st
ill in front of them like he was seeing a phantom. Then he became very qui
ck and quiet. He got down on his knees and began comparing them carefully
point by point, and it was almost like the room was getting warmer and war
mer the way I could feel his excitement growing every second through this
long silent examination in which even the toenails and the dewclaws, eight
een on each dog, were matched alongside one another for colour.
"Look," he said at last, standing up. "Walk them up and down the room a
few times, will you?" And then he had stayed there for quite five or six min
utes leaning against the stove with his eyes half closed and his head on one
side, watching them and frowning and chewing his lips. After that, as thoug
h he didn't believe what he had seen the first time, he had gone down again
on his knees to recheck everything once more; but suddenly, in the middle of
it, he had jumped up and looked at me, his face fixed and tense, with a cur
ious whiteness around the nostrils and the eyes. "All right," he had said, a
little tremor in his voice. 'You know what?
We're home. We're rich."
And then the secret conferences between us in the kitchen, the detailed
planning, the selection of the most suitable track, and finally every other
Saturday, eight times in all, locking up my filling-station (losing a whole
afternoon's custom) and driving the ringer all the way up to Oxford to a scr
uffy little track out in the fields near Headington where the big money was
played but which was actually nothing except a line of old posts and cord to
mark the course, an upturned bicycle for pulling the dummy hare, and at the
far end, in the distance, six traps and the starter. We had driven this rin
ger up there eight times over a period of sixteen weeks and entered him with
Mr Feasey and stood around on the edge of the crowd in freezing raining col
d, waiting for his name to go up on the blackboard in chalk. The Black Panth
er we called him. And when his time came, Claud would always lead him down t
o the traps and I would stand at the finish to catch him and keep him clear
of the fighters, the gipsy dogs that the gipsies so often slipped in special
ly to tear another one to pieces at the end of a race.
But you know, there was something rather sad about taking this dog all
the way up there so many times and letting him run and watching him and h
oping and praying that whatever happened he would always come last. Of cou
rse the praying wasn't necessary and we never really had a moment's worry
because the old fellow simply couldn't gallop and that's all there was to
it. He ran exactly like a crab. The only time he didn't come last was when
a big fawn dog by the name of Amber Flash put his boot in a hole and brok

e a hock and finished on three legs. But even then ours only just beat him
. So this way we got him right down to bottom grade with the scrubbers, an
d the last time we were there all the bookies were laying him twenty or th
irty to one and calling his name and begging people to back him.
Now at last, on this sunny April day, it was Jackie's turn to go instead.
Claud said we mustn't run the ringer any more or Mr Feasey might begin to ge
t tired of him and throw him out altogether, he was so slow. Claud said this
was the exact psychological time to have it off, and that Jackie would win it
anything between thirty and fifty lengths.
He had raised Jackie from a pup and the dog was only fifteen months no
w, but he was a good fast runner. He'd never raced yet; but we knew he was
fast from clocking him round the little private schooling track at Uxbrid
ge where Claud had taken him every Sunday since he was seven months old--e
xcept once when he was having some inoculations, Claud said he probably wa
sn't fast enough to win top grade at Mr Feasey's, but where we'd got him n
ow, in bottom grade with the scrubbers, he could fall over and get up agai
n and still win it twenty well, anyway ten or fifteen lengths, Claud said.
So all I had to do this morning was go to the bank in the village and d
raw out fifty pounds for myself and fifty for Claud which I would lend him
as an advance against wages, and then at twelve o'clock lock up the filling
-station and hang the notice on one of the pumps saying GONE FOR THE DAY. C
laud would shut the ringer in the pen at the back and put Jackie in the van
and off we'd go. I won't say I was as excited as Claud, but there again, I
didn't have all sorts of important things depending on it either, like buy
ing a house and being able to get married. Nor was I almost born in a kenne
l with greyhounds like he was, walking about thinking of absolutely nothing
else all day except perhaps Glance in the evenings. Personally, I had my o
wn career as a filling station owner to keep me busy, not to mention second
-hand cars, but if Claud wanted to fool around with dogs that was all right
with me, especially a thing like today--if it came off. As a matter of fac
t, I don't mind admitting that every time I thought about the money we were
putting on and the money we might win, my stomach gave a little lurch.
The dogs had finished their breakfast now and Claud took them out for a
short walk across the field opposite while I got dressed and fried the eggs.
Afterwards, I went to the bank and drew out the money (all in ones), and th
e rest of the morning seemed to go very quickly serving customers.
At twelve sharp I locked up and hung the notice on the pump. Claud cam
e around from the back leading Jackie and carrying a large suitcase made o
f reddish-brown cardboard.
"Suitcase?"
"For the money," Claud answered. "You said yourself no man can carry t
wo thousand pounds in his pockets."

It was a lovely yellow spring day with the buds bursting all along the h
edges and the sun shining through the new pale green leaves on the big beech
tree across the road. Jackie looked wonderful, with two big hard muscles th
e size of melons bulging on his hindquarters, his coat glistening like black
velvet. While Claud was putting the suitcase in the van, the dog did a litt
le prancing jig on his toes to show how fit he was, then he looked up at me
and grinned, just like he knew he was off to the races to win two thousand p
ounds and a heap of glory. This Jackie had the widest most human-smiling gri
n I ever saw. Not only did he lift his upper lip, but he actually stretched
the corners of his mouth so you could see every tooth in his head except per
haps one or two of the molars right at the back; and every time I saw him do
it I found myself waiting to hear him start laughing out loud as well.
We got in the van and off we went. I was doing the driving. Claud was
beside me and Jackie was standing up on the straw in the rear looking over
our shoulders through the windshield. Claud kept turning round and trying
to make him lie down so he wouldn't get thrown whenever we went round the
sharp corners, but the dog was too excited to do anything except grin bac
k at him and wave his enormous tail.
"You got the money, Gordon?" Claud was chain-smoking cigarettes and quit
e unable to sit still.
"Yes."
"Mine as well?"
"I got a hundred and five altogether. Five for the winder like you said, so
he won't stop the hare and make it a no-race."
"Good," Claud said, rubbing his hands together hard as though he were f
reezing cold. "Good, good, good."
We drove through the little narrow High Street of Great Missenden and
caught a glimpse of old Rummins going into The Nag's Head for his morning
pint, then outside the village we turned left and climbed over the ridge o
f the Chilterns towards Princes Risborough, and from there it would only b
e twenty-odd miles to Oxford.
And now a silence and a kind of tension began to come over us both. We s
at very quiet, not speaking at all, each nursing his own fears and excitemen
ts, containing his anxiety. And Claud kept smoking his cigarettes and throwi
ng them half finished out the window. Usually, on these trips, he talked his
head off all the way there and back, all the things he'd done with dogs in
his life, the jobs he'd pulled, the places he'd been, the money he'd won; an
d all the things other people had done with dogs, the thievery, the cruelty,
the unbelievable trickery and cunning of owners at the flapping tracks. But
today I don't think he was trusting himself to speak very much. At this poi
nt, for that matter, nor was I. I was sitting there watching the road and tr
ying to keep my mind off the immediate future by thinking back on all that s

tuff Claud had told me about this curious greyhound racing racket.
I swear there wasn't a man alive who knew more about it than Claud did,
and ever since we'd got the ringer and decided to pull this job, he'd taken
it upon himself to give me an education in the business. By now, in theory a
t any rate, I suppose I knew nearly as much as him.
It had started during the very first strategy conference we'd had in the
kitchen. I can remember it was the day after the ringer arrived and we were
sitting there watching for customers through the window, and Claud was expl
aining to me all about what we'd have to do, and I was trying to follow him
as best I could until finally there came one question I had to ask.
"What I don't see," I had said, "is why you use the ringer at all. Wouldn
't it be safer if we use Jackie all the time and simply stop him the first ha
lf dozen races so he comes last? Then when we're good and ready, we can let h
im go. Same result in the end, wouldn't it be, if we do it right? And no dang
er of being caught."
Well, as I say, that did it. Claud looked up at me quickly and he said,
"Hey! None of that! I'd just like you to know, 'stopping's' something I ne
ver do. What's come over you, Gordon?" He seemed genuinely pained and shock
ed by what I had said.
"I don't see anything wrong with it."
"Now, listen to me, Gordon. Stopping a good dog breaks his heart. A good
dog knows he's fast, and seeing all the others out there in front and not bei
ng able to catch them--it breaks his heart, I tell you. And what's more, you
wouldn't be making suggestions like that if you knew some of the tricks them
fellers do to stop their dogs at the flapping tracks."
"Such as what, for example?" I had asked.
"Such as anything in the world almost, so long as it makes the dog go slo
wer. And it takes a lot of stopping, a good greyhound does. Full of guts and
so mad keen you can't even let them watch a race, they'll tear the leash righ
t out of your hand rearing to go. Many's the time I've seen one with a broken
leg insisting on finishing the race."
He had paused then, looking at me thoughtfully with those large pale eyes
, serious as hell and obviously thinking deep. "Maybe," he had said, "if we'r
e going to do this job properly I'd better tell you a thing or two so's you'l
l know what we're up against."
"Go ahead and tell me," I had said. "I'd like to know."
For a moment he stared in silence out the window. "The main thing you go
t to remember," he had said darkly, "is that all these fellers going to the
flapping tracks with dogs--they're artful. They're more artful than you coul
d possibly imagine." Again he paused, marshalling his thoughts.
"Now take for example the different ways of stopping a dog. The first, th
e commonest, is strapping."

"Strapping?"
"Yes. Strapping 'em up. That's commonest. Pulling the muzzle-strap tight
around their necks so they can't hardly breathe, see. A clever man knows just
which hole on the strap to use and just how many lengths it'll take off his
dog in a race. Usually a couple of notches is good for five or six lengths. D
o it up real tight and he'll come last. I've known plenty of dogs collapse an
d die from being strapped up tight on a hot day. Strangulated, absolutely str
angulated, and a very nasty thing it was too. Then again, some of 'em just ti
e two of the toes together with black cotton. Dog never runs well like that.
Unbalances him."
"That doesn't sound too bad."
"Then there's others that put a piece of fresh-chewed gum up under their
tails, right up close where the tail joins the body. And there's nothing funn
y about that," he had said, indignant. "The tail of a running dog goes up and
down ever so slightly and the gum on the tail keeps sticking to the hairs on
the backside, just where it's tenderest. No dog likes that, you know. Then t
here's sleeping pills. That's used a lot nowadays. They do it by weight, exac
tly like a doctor, and they measure the powder according to whether they want
to slow him up five or ten or fifteen lengths. Those are just a few of the o
rdinary ways," he had said. "Actually they're nothing. Absolutely nothing, co
mpared with some of the other things that's done to hold a dog back in a race
, especially by the gipsies. There's things the gipsies do that are almost to
o disgusting to mention, such as when they're just putting the dog in the tra
p, things you wouldn't hardly do to your worst enemies."
And when he had told me about those which were, indeed, terrible things b
ecause they had to do with physical injury, quickly, painfully inflicted--the
n he had gone or, to tell me what they did when they wanted the dog to win. "
There's just as terrible things done to make 'em go fast as to make 'em go sl
ow," he had said softly, his face veiled and secret. "And perhaps the commone
st of all is wintergreen. Whenever you see a dog going around with no hair on
his back or little bald patches all over him that's wintergreen. Just before
the race they rub it hard into the skin. Sometimes it's Sloan's Liniment, bu
t mostly it's wintergreen. Stings terrible. Stings so bad that all the old do
g wants to do is run, run, run as fast as he possibly can to get away from th
e pain.
"Then there's special drugs they give with the needle. Mind you, that's
the modern method and most of the spivs at the track are too ignorant to use
it. It's the fellers coming down from London in the big cars with stadium d
ogs they've borrowed for the day by bribing the trainer--they're the ones wh
o use the needle."
I could remember him sitting there at the kitchen table with a cigarett
e dangling from his mouth and dropping his eyelids to keep out the smoke an

d looking at me through his wrinkled, nearly closed eyes, and saying, "What
you've got to remember, Gordon, is this. There's nothing they won't do to
make a dog win if they want him to. On the other hand, no dog can run faste
r than he's built, no matter what they do to him. So if we can get Jackie d
own into bottom grade, then we're home. No dog in bottom grade can get near
him, not even with wintergreen and needles. Not even with ginger."
"Ginger?"
"Certainly. That's a common one, ginger is. What they do, they take a piec
e of raw ginger about the size of a walnut, and about five minutes before the
off they slip it into the dog."
"You mean in his mouth? He eats it?"
"No," he had said. "Not in his mouth."
And so it had gone on. During each of the eight long trips we had subseq
uently made to the track with the ringer I had heard more and more about thi
s charming sport--more, especially, about the methods of stopping them and m
aking them go (even the names of the drugs and the quantities to use). I hea
rd about 'The rat treatment' (for non-chasers, to make them chase the dummy
hare), where a rat is placed in a can which is then tied around the dog's ne
ck. There's a small hole in the lid of the can just large enough for the rat
to poke its head out and nip the dog. But the dog can't get at the rat, and
so naturally he goes half crazy running around and being bitten in the neck
, and the more he shakes the can the more the rat bites him. Finally, someon
e releases the rat, and the dog, who up to then was a nice docile tail-waggi
ng animal who wouldn't hurt a mouse, pounces on it in a rage and tears it to
pieces. Do this a few times, Claud had said--"mind you, I don't hold with i
t myself"--and the dog becomes a real killer who will chase anything, even t
he dummy hare.
We were over the Chilterns now and running down out of the beechwoods
into the flat elmand oak-tree country south of Oxford. Claud sat quietly b
eside me, nursing his nervousness and smoking cigarettes, and every two or
three minutes he would turn round to see if Jackie was all right. The dog
was at last lying down, and each time Claud turned round, he whispered so
mething to him softly, and the dog acknowledged his words with a faint mov
ement of the tail that made the straw rustle.
Soon we would be coming into Thame, the broad High Street where they
penned the pigs and cows and sheep on market day, and where the Fair came
once a year with the swings and roundabouts and bumping cars and gipsy c
aravans right there in the street in the middle of the town. Claud was bo
rn in Thame, and we'd never driven through it yet without him mentioning
the fact.
"Well," he said as the first houses came into sight, "here's Thame. I w
as born and bred in Thame, you know, Gordon."

"You told me."
"Lots of funny things we used to do around here when we was nippers," he
said, slightly nostalgic.
"I'm sure."
He paused, and I think more to relieve the tension building up inside him
than anything else, he began talking about the years of his youth.
"There was a boy next door," he said. "Gilbert Gomm his name was. Litt
le sharp ferrety face and one leg a bit shorter'n the other. Shocking thin
gs him and me used to do together. You know one thing we done, Gordon?"
"What?"
"We'd go into the kitchen Saturday nights when mum and dad were at the p
ub, and we'd disconnect the pipe from the gas-ring and bubble the gas into a
milk bottle full of water. Then we'd sit down and drink it out of teacups."
"Was that so good?"
"Good! It was absolutely disgusting! But we'd put lashings of sugar in and
then it didn't taste so bad."
"Why did you drink it?"
Claud turned and looked at me, incredulous. "You mean you never drunk
'Snakes Water'!"
"Can't say I have."
"I thought everyone done that when they was kids! It intoxicates you, ju
st like wine only worse, depending on how long you let the gas bubble throug
h. We used to get reeling drunk together there in the kitchen Saturday night
s and it was marvellous. Until one night Dad comes home early and catches us
. I'll never forget that night as long as I live. There was me holding the m
ilk bottle, and the gas bubbling through it lovely, and Gilbert kneeling on
the floor ready to turn off the tap the moment I give the word, and in walks
Dad."
"What did he say?"
"Oh, Christ, Gordon, that was terrible. He didn't say one word, but he s
tands there by the door and he starts feeling for his belt, undoing the buck
le very slow and pulling the belt slow out of his trousers, looking at me al
l the time. Great big feller he was, with great big hands like coal hammers
and a black moustache and them little purple veins running all over his chee
ks. Then he comes over quick and grabs me by the coat and lets me have it, h
ard as he can, using the end with the buckle on it and honest to God, Gordon
, I thought he was going to kill me. But in the end he stops and then he put
s on the belt again, slow and careful, buckling it up and tuckling in the fl
ap and belching with the beer he'd drunk. And then he walks out again back t
o the pub, still without saying a word. Worst hiding I ever had in my life."
"How old were you then?"

"Round about eight, I should think," Claud said.
As we drew closer to Oxford, he became silent again. He kept twisting
his neck to see if Jackie was all right, to touch him, to stroke his head,
and once he turned around and knelt on the seat to gather more straw arou
nd the dog, murmuring something about a draught. We drove around the fring
e of Oxford and into a network of narrow open country roads, and after a w
hile we turned into a small bumpy lane and along this we began to overtake
a thin stream of men and women all walking and cycling in the same direct
ion. Some of the men were leading greyhounds. There was a large saloon car
in front of us and through the rear window we could see a dog sitting on
the back seat between two men.
"They come from all over," Claud said darkly. "That one there's probabl
y come up special from London. Probably slipped him out from one of the big
stadium kennels just for the afternoon.
That could be a Derby dog probably for all we know."
"Hope he's not running against Jackie."
"Don't worry," Claud said. "All new dogs automatically go in top grade. T
hat's one rule Mr Feasey's very particular about."
There was an open gate leading into a field, and Mr Feasey's wife came
forward to take our admission money before we drove in.
"He'd have her winding the bloody pedals too if she had the strength; Cl
aud said. "Old Feasey don't employ more people than he has to."
I drove across the field and parked at the end of a line of cars along t
he top hedge. We both got out and Claud went quickly round the back to fetch
Jackie. I stood beside the car, waiting. It was a very large field with a s
teepish slope on it and we were at the top of the slope, looking down. In th
e distance I could see the six starting traps and the wooden posts marking t
he track which ran along the bottom of the field and turned sharp at right a
ngles and came on up the hill towards the crowd, to the finish. Thirty yards
beyond the finishing line stood the upturned bicycle for driving the hare.
Because it is portable, this is the standard machine for hare-driving used a
t all flapping tracks. It comprises a flimsy wooden platform about eight fee
t high, supported on four poles knocked into the ground. On top of the platf
orm there is fixed, upside down with wheels in the air, an ordinary old bicy
cle. The rear wheel is to the front, facing down the track, and from it the
tyre has been removed, leaving a concave metal rim. One end of the cord that
pulls the hare is attached to this rim, and the winder (or hare driver), by
straddling the bicycle at the back and turning the pedals with his hands, r
evolves the wheel and winds in the cord around the rim. This pulls the dummy
hare towards him at any speed he likes up to forty miles an hour. After eac
h race someone takes the dummy hare (with cord attached) all the way down to
the starting traps again, thus unwinding the cord on the wheel, ready for a

fresh start. From his high platform, the winder can watch the race and regu
late the speed of the hare to keep it just ahead of the leading dog. He can
also stop the hare any time he wants to make it a 'no race' (if the wrong do
g looks like winning) by suddenly turning the pedals backwards and getting t
he cord tangled up in the hub of the wheel. The other way of doing it is to
slow down the hare suddenly, for perhaps one second, and that makes the lead
dog automatically check a little so that the others catch up with him. He is an importa
I could see Mr Feasey's winder already standing atop his platform, a po
werful-looking man in a blue sweater, leaning on the bicycle and looking do
wn at the crowd through the smoke of his cigarette.
There is a curious law in England which permits race meetings of this ki
nd to be held only seven times a year over one piece of ground. That is why
all Mr Feasey's equipment was movable, and after the seventh meeting he woul
d simply transfer to the next field. The law didn't bother him at all.
There was already a good crowd and the bookmarkers were erecting their
stands in a line over to the right. C laud had Jackie out of the van now an
d was leading him over to a group of people clustered around a small stocky
man dressed in riding-breeches Mr Feasey himself. Each person in the group
had a dog on a leash and Mr Feasey kept writing names in a notebook that h
e held folded in his left hand. I sauntered over to watch.
"Which you got there?" Mr Feasey said, pencil poised above the notebook
.
"Midnight," a man said who was holding a black dog.
Mr Feasey stepped back a pace and looked most carefully at the dog.
"Midnight. Right. I got him down."
"Jane," the next man said.
"Let me look. Jane... Jane... yes, all right."
"Soldier." This dog was led by a tall man with long teeth who wore a dark
-blue, doublebreasted lounge suit, shiny with wear, and when he said 'Soldier
' he began slowly to scratch the seat of his trousers with the hand that wasn
't holding the leash.
Mr Feasey bent down to examine the dog. The other man looked up at the
sky.
"Take him away," Mr Feasey said.
The man looked down quick and stopped scratching.
"Go on, take him away."
"Listen, Mr Feasey," the man said, lisping slightly through his long teeth.
"Now don't talk so bloody silly, please."
"Go on and beat it, Larry, and stop wasting my time. You know as well as
I do the Soldier's got two white toes on his off fore."
"Now look, Mr Feasey," the man said. "You ain't even seen Soldier for six

months at least."
"Come on now, Larry, and beat it. I haven't got time arguing with you." M
r Feasey didn't appear the least angry. "Next," he said.
I saw Claud step forward leading Jackie. The large bovine face was fixe
d and wooden, the eyes staring at something about a yard above Mr Feasey's
head, and he was holding the leash so tight his knuckles were like a row of
little white onions. I knew just how he was feeling. I felt the same way m
yself at that moment, and it was even worse when Mr Feasey suddenly started
laughing.
"Hey!" he cried. "Here's the Black Panther. Here's the champion."
"That's right, Mr Feasey," Claud said.
"Well, I'll 'tell you," Mr Feasey said, still grinning. "You can take him
right back home where he come from. I don't want him."
"But look here, Mr Feasey..
"Six or eight times at least I've run him for you now and that's enough.
Look--why don't you shoot him and have done with it?"
"Now, listen, Mr Feasey, please. Just once more and I'll never ask you aga
in."
"Not even once! I got more dogs than I can handle here today. There's no
room for crabs like that." I thought Claud was going to cry.
"Now honest, Mr Feasey," he said. "I been up at six every morning this
past two weeks giving him roadwork and massage and buying him beefsteaks,
and believe me he's a different dog absolutely than what he was last time
he run."
The words 'different dog' caused Mr Feasey to jump like he'd been pricked
with a hatpin. "What's that!" he cried. "Different dog!"
I'll say this for Claud, he kept his head. "See here, Mr Feasey," he said.
"I'll thank you not to go implying things to me. You know very well I didn't
mean that."
"All right, all right. But just the same, you can take him away. There'
s no sense running dogs as slow as him. Take him home now, will you please,
and don't hold up the whole meeting."
I was watching Claud. Claud was watching Mr Feasey. Mr Feasey was looki
ng round for the next dog to enter up. Under his brown tweedy jacket he wor
e a yellow pullover, and this streak of yellow on his breast and his thin g
aitered legs and the way he jerked his head from side to side made him seem
like some sort of a little perky bird--a goldfinch, perhaps.
Claud took a step forward. His face was beginning to purple slightly wi
th the outrage of it all and I could see his Adam's apple moving up and dow
n as he swallowed.
"I'll tell you what I'll do, Mr Feasey. I'm so absolutely sure this dog's imp
roved I'll bet you a quid he don't finish last. There you are."

Mr Feasey turned slowly around and looked at Claud. "You crackers?" he a
sked. "I'll bet you a quid, there you are, just to prove what I'm saying."
It was a dangerous move, certain to cause suspicion, but Claud knew it
was the only thing left to do. There was silence while Mr Feasey bent down
and examined the dog. I could see the way his eyes were moving slowly over
the animal's whole body, part by part. There was something to admire in the
man's thoroughness, and in his memory; something to fear also in this self
-confident little rogue who held in his head the shape and colour and marki
ngs of perhaps several hundred different but very similar dogs. He never ne
eded more than one little clue--a small scar, a splay toe, a trifle in at t
he hocks, a less pronounced wheelback, a slightly darker brindle--Mr Feasey
always remembered.
So I watched him now as he bent down over Jackie. His face was pink and
fleshy, the mouth small and tight as though it couldn't stretch enough to
make a smile, and the eyes were like two little cameras focused sharply on
the dog.
"Well," he said, straightening up. "It's the same dog, anyway."
"I should hope so too!" Claud cried. "Just what sort of a fellow you thin
k I am, Mr Feasey?"
"I think you're crackers, that's what I think. But it's a nice easy way t
o make a quid. I suppose you forgot how Amber Flash nearly beat him on three
legs last meeting?"
"This one wasn't fit then," Claud said. "He hadn't had beefsteak and mas
sage and roadwork like I've been giving him lately. But look Mr Feasey, you'
re not to go sticking him in top grade just to win the bet. This is a bottom
grade dog, Mr Feasey. You know that."
Mr Feasey laughed. The small button mouth opened into a tiny circle and
he laughed and looked at the crowd who laughed with him. "Listen," he said
, laying a hairy hand on Claud's shoulder. "I know my dogs. I don't have to
do any fiddling around to win this quid. He goes in bottom."
"Right," Claud said. "That's a bet." He walked away with Jackie and I joi
ned him.
"Jesus, Gordon, that was a near one!"
"Shook me."
"But we're in now," Claud said. He had that breathless look on his face
again and he was walking about quick and funny, like the ground was burning
his feet.
People were still coming through the gate into the field and there were
easily three hundred of them now. Now a very nice crowd. Sharpnosed men an
d women with dirty faces and bad teeth and quick shifty eyes. The dregs of
the big town. Oozing out like sewage from a cracked pipe and trickling alon
g the road through the gate and making a smelly little pond of sewage at th

e top end of the field. They were all there, all the spivs, and the gipsies
and the touts and the dregs and the sewage and the scraping and the scum f
rom the cracked drainpipes of the big town. Some with dogs, some without. D
ogs led about on pieces of string, miserable dogs with hanging heads, thin
mangy dogs with sores on their quarters (from sleeping on board), sad old d
ogs with grey muzzles, doped dogs, dogs stuffed with porridge to stop them
winning, dogs walking stiff-legged--one especially, a white one. "Claud, wh
y is that white one walking so stiff-legged?"
"Which one?"
"That one over there."
"Ah. Yes, I see. Very probably because he's been hung."
"Hung?"
"Yes, hung. Suspended in a harness for twenty-four hours with his legs d
angling."
"Good God, but why?"
"To make him run slow, of course. Some people don't hold with dope or s
tuffing or strapping up. So they hang 'em."
"I see."
"Either that," Claud said, "or they sandpaper them. Rub their pads with r
ough sandpaper and take the skin off so it hurts when they run."
"Yes, I see."
And then the fitter, brighter-looking dogs, the better-fed ones who get h
orsemeat every day, not pig-swill or rusk and cabbage water, their coats shin
ier, their tails moving, pulling at their leads, undoped, unstuffed, awaiting
perhaps a more unpleasant fate, the muzzle-strap to be tightened an extra fo
ur notches. But make sure he can breathe now, Jock. Don't choke him completel
y. Don't let's have him collapse in the middle of the race. Just-so he wheeze
s a bit, see. Go on tightening it up an extra notch at a time until you can h
ear him wheezing. You'll see his mouth open and he'll start breathing heavy.
Then it's just right, but not if his eyeballs is bulging. Watch out for that,
will you? Okay?
Okay.
"Let's get away from the crowd, Gordon. It don't do Jackie no good gettin
g excited by all these other dogs."
We walked up the slope to where the cars were parked, then back and for
th in front of the line of cars, keeping the dog on the move. Inside some o
f the cars I could see men sitting with their dogs, and the men scowled at
us through the windows as we went by.
"Watch out now, Gordon. We don't want any trouble."
"No, all right."
These were the best dogs of all, the secret ones kept in the cars and tak
en out quick just to be entered up (under some invented name) and put back ag

ain quick and held there till the last minute, then straight down to the trap
s and back again into the cars after the race so no nosy bastard gets too clo
se a look. The trainer at the big stadium said so. All right, he said. You ca
n have him, but for Christsake don't let anybody recognize him. There's thous
ands of people know this dog, so you've got to be careful, see. And it'll cos
t you fifty pound.
Very fast dogs these, but it doesn't much matter how fast they are they
probably get the needle anyway, just to make sure. One and a half c.c.s. of
ether, subcutaneous, done in the car, injected very slow. That'll put ten le
ngths on any dog. Or sometimes it's caffein in oil, or camphor. That makes t
hem go too. The men in the big cars know all about that. And some of them kn
ow about whisky. But that's intravenous. Not so easy when it's intravenous.
Might miss the vein. All you got to do is miss the vein and it don't work an
d where are you then? So it's ether, or it's caffein, or it's camphor. Don't
give her too much of that stuff now, Jock What does she weigh? Fifty-eight
pounds. All right then, you know what the man told us. Wait a minute now. I
got it written down on a piece of paper. Here it is. Point I of a c.c. per 1
0 pounds bodyweigh t equals 5 lengths over 300 yards. Wait a minute now whil
e I work it out. Oh Christ, you better guess it. Just guess it, Jock. It'll
be all right you'll find. Shouldn't be any trouble anyway because I picked t
he others in the race myself Cost me a tenner to old Feasey. A bloody tenner
I gave him, my dear Mr Feasey, I says, that's for your birthday and because
I love you.
Thank you ever so much, Mr Feasey says. Thank you, my good and truste
d friend.
And for stopping them, for the men in the big cars, it's chlorbutal. That
's beauty, chlorbutal, because you can give it the night before, especially t
o someone else's dog. Or Pethidine. Pethidine and Hyoscine mixed, whatever th
at may be.
"Lot of fine old English sporting gentry here," Claud said.
"Certainly are."
"Watch your pockets, Gordon. You got that money hidden away?"
We walked around the back of the line of cars--between the cars and the
hedge--and I saw Jackie stiffen and begin to pull forward on the leash, ad
vancing with a stiff crouching tread. About thirty yards away there were tw
o men. One was holding a large fawn greyhound, the dog stiff and tense like
Jackie. The other was holding a sack in his hands.
"Watch," Claud whispered, "they're giving him a kill."
Out of the sack on to the grass tumbled a small white rabbit, fluffy whi
te, young, tame. It righted itself and sat still, crouching in the hunched u
p way rabbits crouch, its nose close to the ground. A frightened rabbit. Out
of the sack so suddenly on to the grass with such a bump. Into the bright l

ight. The dog was going mad with excitement, now, jumping up against the lea
sh, pawing the ground, throwing himself forward, whining. The rabbit saw the
dog. It drew in its head and stayed still, paralysed with fear. The man tra
nsferred his hold to the dog's collar, and the dog twisted and jumped and tr
ied to get free. The other man pushed the rabbit with his foot but it was to
o terrified to move. He pushed it again, flicking it forward with his toe li
ke a football, and the rabbit rolled over several times, righted itself and
began to hop over the grass away from the dog. The other man released the do
g which pounced with one huge pounce upon the rabbit, and then came the sque
als, not very loud but shrill and anguished and lasting rather a long time.
"There you are," Claud said. "That's a kill."
"Not sure I like it very much."
"I told you before, Gordon. Most of 'em does it. Keens the dog up before
a race."
"I still don't like it."
"Nor me. But they all do it. Even in the big stadiums the trainers do it. Pro
per barbary I call it."
We strolled away and below us on the slope of the hill the crowd was th
ickening and the bookies' stands with the names written on them in red and
gold and blue were all erected now in a long line back of the crowd, each b
ookie already stationed on an upturned box beside his stand, a pack of numb
ered cards in one hand, a piece of chalk in the other, his clerk behind him
with book and pencil. Then we saw Mr Feasey walking over to a blackboard t
hat was nailed to a post stuck in the ground.
"He's chalking up the first race," Claud said. "Come on, quick!"
We walked rapidly down the hill and joined the crowd. Mr Feasey was wr
iting the runners on the blackboard, copying names from his softcovered no
tebook, and a little hush of suspense fell upon the crowd as they watched.

1. Sally
2. Three Quid
3. Snailbox Lady
4. Black Panther

5. Whisky
6. Rockit
"He's in it!" Claud whispered. "First race! Trap four! Now, listen, Gordon
! Give me a flyer quick to show the winder." Claud could hardly speak from
excitement. That patch of whiteness had returned around his nose and eyes
, and when I handed him a five pound note, his whole arm was shaking as he
took it. The man who was going to wind the bicycle pedals was still stand
ing on top of the wooden platform in his blue jersey, smoking. Claud went
over and stood below him, looking up.
"See this flyer," he said, talking softly, holding it folded small in the pal
m of his hand.
The man glanced at it without moving his head.
"Just so long as you wind her true this race, see. No stopping and no slo
wing down and run her fast. Right?"
The man didn't move but there was a slight, almost imperceptible lifting
of the eyebrows. Claud turned away.
"Now, look, Gordon. Get the money on gradual, all in little bits like I to
ld you. Just keep going down the line putting on little bits so you don't kill
the price, see. And I'll be walking Jackie down very slow, as slow as I dare,
to give you plenty of time. Right?"
"Right."
"And don't forget to be standing ready to catch him at the end of the rac
e. Get him clear away from all them others when they start fighting for the h
are. Grab a hold of him tight and don't let go till I come running up with th
e collar and lead. That Whisky's a gipsy dog and he'll tear the leg off anyth
ing as gets in his way."
"Right," I said. "Here we go."
I saw Claud lead Jackie over to the finishing post and collect a yellow
jacket with 4 written on it large. Also a muzzle. The other five runners wer
e there too, the owners fussing around them, putting on their numbered jacke
ts, adjusting their muzzles. Mr Feasey was officiating, hopping about in his
tight riding-breeches like an anxious perky bird, and once I saw him say so
mething to Claud and laugh. Claud ignored him. Soon they would all start to
lead the dogs down the track, the long walk down the hill and across to the
far corner of the field to the starting-traps. It would take them ten minute
s to walk it. I've got at least ten minutes, I told myself, and then I began
to push my way through the crowd standing six or seven deep in front of the
line of bookies.

"Even money Whisky! Even money Whisky! Five to two Sally! Even mon
ey Whisky! Four to one Snailbox! Come on now! Hurry up, hurry up. Whic
h is it?"
On every board all down the line the Black Panther was chalked up at twe
nty-five to one. I edged forward to the nearest book.
"Three pounds Black Panther," I said, holding out the money.
The man on the box had an inflamed magenta face and traces of some whit
e substance around the corners of his mouth. He snatched the money and drop
ped it in his satchel. "Seventyfive pounds to three Black Panther," he said
. "Number forty-two." He handed me a ticket and his clerk recorded the bet.
I stepped back and wrote rapidly on the back of the ticket 75 to 3, then s
lipped it into the inside pocket of my jacket with the money.
So long as I continued to spread the cash out thin like this, it ought t
o be all right. And anyway, on Claud's instructions, I'd made a point of bet
ting a few pounds on the ringer every time he'd run so as not to arouse any
suspicion when the real day arrived. Therefore, with some confidence, I went
all the way down the line staking three pounds with each book. I didn't hur
ry, but I didn't waste any time either, and after each bet I wrote the amoun
t on the back of the card before slipping it into my pocket. There were seve
nteen bookies. I had seventeen tickets and had laid out fifty-one pounds wit
hout disturbing the price one point. Forty-nine pounds left to get on. I gla
nced quickly down the hill. One owner and his dog had already reached the tr
aps. The others were only twenty or thirty yards away. Except for Claud. Cla
ud and Jackie were only half way there. I could see Claud in his old khaki g
reatcoat sauntering slowly along with Jackie pulling ahead keenly on the lea
sh, and once I saw him stop completely and bend down pretending to pick some
thing up. When he went on again he seemed to have developed a limp so as to
go slower still. I hurried back to the other end of the line to start again.
"Three pounds Black Panther."
The bookmaker, the one with the magenta face and the white substance ar
ound the mouth, glanced up sharply, remembering the last time, and in one s
wift almost graceful movement of the arm he licked his fingers and wiped th
e figure twenty-five neatly off the board. His wet fingers left a small dar
k patch opposite Black Panther's name.
"All right, you got one more seventy-five to three; he said. "But that's t
he lot." Then he raised his voice and shouted, "Fifteen to one Black Panther!
Fifteens the Panther!"
All down the line the twenty-fives were wiped out and it. was fifteen t
o one the Panther now. I took it quick, but by the time I was through the b
ookies had had enough and they weren't quoting him any more. They'd only ta
ken six pounds each, but they stood to lose a hundred and fifty, and for th
em--small-time bookies at a little country flapping-track--that was quite e

nough for one race, thank you very much. I felt pleased the way I'd managed
it. Lots of tickets now. I took them out of my pockets and counted them an
d they were like a thin pack of cards in my hand. Thirty-three tickets in a
ll. And what did we stand to win? Let me see... something over two thousand
pounds. Claud had said he'd win it thirty lengths. Where was Claud now?
Far away down the hill I could see the khaki greatcoat standing by the
traps and the big black dog alongside. All the other dogs were already in a
nd the owners were beginning to walk away. Claud was bending down, coaxing
Jackie into number four, and then he was closing the door and turning away
and beginning to run up the hill towards the crowd, the greatcoat flapping
around him. He kept looking back over his shoulder as he ran.
Beside the traps the starter stood, and his hand was up waving a handker
chief. At the other end of the track, beyond the winning-post, quite close t
o where I stood, the man in the blue jersey was straddling the upturned bicy
cle on top of the wooden platform and he saw the signal and waved back and b
egan to turn the pedals with his hands. Then a tiny white dot in the distanc
e--the artificial hare that was in reality a football with a piece of white
rabbit-skin tacked on to it--began to move away from the traps, accelerating
fast. The traps went up and the dogs flew out. They flew out in a single da
rk lump, all together, as though it were one wide dog instead of six, and al
most at once I saw Jackie drawing away from the field. I knew it was Jackie
because of the colour. There weren't any other black dogs in the race. It wa
s Jackie, all right. Don't move, I told myself, Don't move a muscle or an ey
elid or a toe or a finger-tip. Stand quite still and don't move. Watch him g
oing. Come on Jackson, boy! No, don't shout. It's unlucky to shout. And don'
t move. Be all over in twenty seconds. Round the sharp bend now and coming u
p the hill and he must be fifteen or twenty lengths clear. Easy twenty lengt
hs. Don't count the lengths, it's unlucky. And don't move. Don't move your h
ead. Watch him out of your eye-corners. Watch that Jackson go! He's really l
aying down to it now up that hill. He's won it now! He can't lose it now..
When I got over to him he was fighting the rabbit-skin and trying to pi
ck it up in his mouth, but his muzzle wouldn't allow it, and the other dogs
were pounding up behind him and suddenly they were all on top of him grabb
ing for the rabbit and I got hold of him round the neck and dragged him cle
ar like Claud had said and knelt down on the grass and held him tight with
both arms round his body. The other catchers were having a time all trying
to grab their own dogs.
Then Claud was beside me, blowing heavily, unable to speak from blowing
and excitement, removing Jackie's muzzle, putting on the collar and lead,
and Mr Feasey was there too standing with hands on hips, the button mouth p
ursed up tight like a mushroom, the two little cameras staring at Jackie al
l over again.

"So that's the game, is it?" he said.
Claud was bending over the dog and acting like he hadn't heard.
"I don't want you here no more after this, you understand that?"
Claud went on fiddling with Jackie's collar.
I heard someone behind us saying, "That flatfaced bastard swung it pro
perly on old Feasey this time." Someone else laughed. Mr Feasey walked awa
y, Claud straightened up and went over with Jackie to the hare driver in t
he blue jersey who had dismounted from his platform.
"Cigarette," Claud said, offering the pack.
The man took one, also the five pound note that was folded up small in Cl
aud's fingers.
"Thanks," Claud said. "Thanks very much."
"Don't mention," the man said. Then Claud turned to me. "You get it al
l on, Gordon?" He was jumping up and down and rubbing his hands and pattin
g Jackie, and his lips trembled as he spoke.
"Yes. Half at twenty-fives, half at fifteens."
"Oh Christ, Gordon, that's marvellous. Wait here till I get the suitcase."
"You take Jackie," I said, "and go and sit in the car. I'll see you later."
There was nobody around the bookies now. I was the only one with anyt
hing to collect, and I walked slowly with a sort of dancing stride and a
wonderful bursting feeling in my chest, towards the first one in the line
, the man with the magenta face and the white substance on his mouth. I s
tood in front of him and I took all the time I wanted going through my pa
ck of tickets to find the two that were his. The name was Syd Pratchett.
It was written up large across his board in gold letters on a scarlet fie
ld 'SYD PRATCHETT. THE BEST ODDS IN THE MIDLANDS. PROMPT SETTL
I handed him the first ticket and said, "Seventy-eight pounds to come." I
t sounded so good I said it again, making a delicious little song of it. "Sev
enty-eight pounds to come on this one." I didn't mean to gloat over Mr Pratch
ett. As a matter of fact, I was beginning to like him quite a lot. I even fel
t sorry for him having to fork out so much money. I hoped his wife and kids w
ouldn't suffer.
"Number forty-two," Mr Pratchett said, turning to his clerk who held th
e big book. "Forty-two wants seventy-eight pounds." There was a pause while
the clerk ran his finger down the column of recorded bets. He did this twi
ce, then he looked up at the boss and began to shake his head.
"No," he said. "Don't pay. That ticket backed Snailbox Lady."
Mr Pratchett, standing on his box, leaned over and peered down at the b
ook. He seemed to be disturbed by what the clerk had said, and there was a
look of genuine concern on the huge magenta face.
The clerk is a fool, I thought, and any moment now Mr Pratchett's going to
tell him so.

But when Mr Pratchett turned back to me, the eyes had become narrow and
hostile. "Now, look Charley," he said softly. "Don't let's have any of tha
t. You know very well you bet Snailbox. What's the idea?"
"I bet Black Panther," I said. "Two separate bets of three pounds each at
twenty-five to one. Here's the second ticket."
This time he didn't even bother to check it with the book. "You bet Sna
ilbox, Charley," he said. "I remember you coming round." With that, he turn
ed away from me and started wiping the names of the last race runners off h
is board with a wet rag. Behind him, the clerk had closed the book and was
lighting himself a cigarette. I stood watching them, and I could feel the s
weat beginning to break through the skin all over my body.
"Let me see the book."
Mr Pratchett blew his nose in the wet rag and dropped it to the ground.
"Look," he said, "why don't you go away and stop annoying me?"
The point was this: a bookmaker's ticket, unlike a totalisator ticket, ne
ver has anything written on it regarding the nature of your bet. This is norm
al practice, the same at every racetrack in the country, whether it's the Sil
ver Ring at Newmarket, the Royal Enclosure at Ascot, or a tiny country flappi
ng-track near Oxford. All you receive is a card bearing the bookie's name and
a serial number. The wager is (or should be) recorded by the bookie's clerk
in his book alongside the number of the ticket, but apart from that there is
no evidence at all of how you betted.
"Go on," Mr Pratchett was saying. "Hop it."
I stepped back a pace and glanced down the long line of bookmakers. No
ne of them was looking my way. Each was standing motionless on his little
wooden box beside his wooden placard, staring straight ahead into the crow
d. I went up to the next one and presented a ticket.
"I had three pounds on Black Panther at twenty-five to one," I said firm
ly. "Seventy-eight pounds to come."
This man, who had a soft inflamed face, went through exactly the same r
outine as Mr Pratchett, questioning his clerk, peering at the book, and giv
ing me the same answers.
"Whatever's the matter with you?" he said quietly, speaking to me as thoug
h I were eight years old. "Trying such a silly thing as that."
This time I stepped well back. "You dirty thieving bastards!" I cried. "Th
e whole lot of you!"
Automatically, as though they were puppets, all the heads down the line
flicked round and looked at me. The expressions didn't alter. It was just th
e heads that moved, all seventeen of them, and seventeen pairs of cold glass
y eyes looked down at me. There was not the faintest flicker of interest in
any of them.
'Somebody spoke,' they seemed to be saying. 'We didn't hear it. It's a nice

day today.'
The crowd, sensing excitement, was beginning to move in around me. I ran
back to Mr Pratchett, right up close to him and poked him in the stomach wi
th my finger. "You're a thief! A lousy little thief!" I shouted.
The extraordinary thing was, Mr Pratchett didn't seem to resent this at all.

"Well, I never," he said. "Look who's talking."
Then suddenly the big face broke into a wide, frog-like grin, and he loo
ked over at the crowd and shouted. "Look who's talking!"
All at once everybody started to laugh. Down the line the bookies were c
oming to life and turning to each other and laughing and pointing at me and
shouting, "Look who's talking! Look who's talking!" The crowd began to take
up the cry as well, and I stood there on the grass alongside Mr Pratchett wi
th his wad of tickets as thick as a pack of cards in my hand, listening to t
hem and feeling slightly hysterical. Over the heads of the people I could se
e Mr Feasey beside his blackboard, already chalking up the runners for the n
ext race; and then beyond him, far away up the top of the field, I caught si
ght of Claud standing by the van, waiting for me with the suitcase in his ha
nd.
It was time to go home.
====================================== EIGHT FURTHER TALES O
THE UNEXPECTED ====================================== The Umb
Man 'M going to tell you about a funny thing that happened to my
mother and me yesterday evening. I am twelve years old and I'm a g
irl. My mother is thirty-four but I am nearly as tall as her alrea
dy.
Yesterday afternoon, my mother took me up to London to see the dentist.
He found one hole. It was in a back tooth and he filled it without hurting m
e too much. After that, we went to a cafŽ. I had a banana split and my mothe
r had a cup of coffee. By the time we got up to leave it was about six o'clo
ck.
When we came out of the cafŽ it had started to rain. "We must get a taxi
," my mother said. We were wearing ordinary hats and coats, and it was raini
ng quite hard.
"Why don't we go back into the cafŽ and wait for it to stop?" I said. I w
anted another of those banana splits. They were gorgeous.
"It isn't going to stop," my mother said. "We must get home."
We stood on the pavement in the rain, looking for a taxi. Lots of them c
ame by but they all had passengers inside them. "I wish we had a car with a
chauffeur," my mother said.
Just then a man came up to us. He was a small man and he was pretty ol
d, probably seventy or more. He raised his hat politely and said to my mot

her, "Excuse me, I do hope you will excuse me... " He had a fine white mou
stache and bushy white eyebrows and a wrinkly pink face. He was sheltering
under an umbrella which he held high over his head.
"Yes?" my mother said, very cool and distant.
"I wonder if I could ask a small favour of you," he said. "It is only a very
small favour."
I saw my mother looking at him suspiciously. She is a suspicious perso
n, my mother. She is especially suspicious of two things--strange men and
boiled eggs. When she cuts the top off a boiled egg, she pokes around insi
de it with her spoon as though expecting to find a mouse or something. Wit
h strange men, she has a golden rule which says, 'The nicer the man seems
to be, the more suspicious you must become.' This little old man was parti
cularly nice. He was polite. He was welispoken. He was well-dressed. He wa
s a real gentleman. The reason I knew he was a gentleman was because of hi
s shoes. 'You can always spot a gentleman by the shoes he wears,' was anot
her of my mother's favourite sayings. This man had beautiful brown shoes.
"The truth of the matter is," the little man was saying, "I've got myself
into a bit of a scrape. I need some help. Not much I assure you. It's almost n
othing, in fact, but I do need it. You see, madam, old people like me often be
come terribly forgetful...
My mother's chin was up and she was staring down at him along the full
length of her nose. It was a fearsome thing, this frosty-nosed stare of my
mother's. Most people go to pieces completely when she gives it to them. I
once saw my own headmistress begin to stammer and simper like an idiot when
my mother gave her a really foul frosty-noser. But the little man on the p
avement with the umbrella over his head didn't bat an eyelid. He gave a gen
tle smile and said, "I beg you to believe, madam, that I am not in the habi
t of stopping ladies in the street and telling them my troubles."
"I should hope not," my mother said.
I felt quite embarrassed by my mother's sharpness. I wanted to say to her
, 'Oh, mummy, for heaven's sake, he's a very very old man, and he's sweet and
polite, and he's in some sort of trouble, so don't be so beastly to him.' Bu
t I didn't say anything.
The little man shifted his umbrella from one hand to the other. "I've never
forgotten it before," he said.
"You've never forgotten what?" my mother asked sternly.
"My wallet," he said. "I must have left it in my other jacket. Isn't that the
silliest thing to do?"
"Are you asking me to give you money?" my mother said.
"Oh, good gracious me, no!" he cried. "Heaven forbid I should ever do tha
t!"
"Then what are you asking?" my mother said. "Do hurry up. We're getting

soaked to the skin here."
"I know you are," he said. "And that is why I'm offering you this umbrella
of mine to protect you, and to keep forever, if... if only... "If only what?"
my mother said.
"If only you would give me in return a pound for my taxi-fare just to get
me home."
My mother was still suspicious. "If you had no money in the first place,"
she said, "then how did you get here?"
"I walked," he answered. "Every day I go for a lovely long walk and then
I summon a taxi to take me home. I do it every day of the year."
"Why don't you walk home now?" my mother asked.
"Oh, I wish I could," he said. "I do wish I could. But I don't think I could
manage it on these silly old legs of mine. I've gone too far already."
My mother stood there chewing her lower lip. She was beginning to melt a
bit, I could see that. And the idea of getting an umbrella to shelter under
must have tempted her a good deal.
"It's a lovely umbrella," the little man said.
"So I've noticed," my mother said.
"It's silk," he said.
"I can see that."
"Then why don't you take it, madam," he said. "It cost me over twenty po
unds, I promise you. But that's of no importance so long as I can get home a
nd rest these old legs of mine."
I saw my mother's hand feeling for the clasp of her purse. She saw me wa
tching her. I was giving her one of my own frosty-nosed looks this time and
she knew exactly what I was telling her. Now listen, mummy, I was telling he
r, you simply mustn't take advantage of a tired old man in this way. It's a
rotten thing to do. My mother paused and looked back at me. Then she said to
the little man, "I don't think it's quite right that I should take an umbre
lla from you worth twenty pounds. I think I'd better just give you the taxifare and be done with it."
"No, no no!" he cried. "It's out of the question! I wouldn't dream of it!
Not in a million years! I would never accept money from you like that! Take
the umbrella, dear lady, and keep the rain off your shoulders!"
My mother gave me a triumphant sideways look. There you are, she was t
elling me. You're wrong. He wants me to have it.
She fished into her purse and took out a pound note. She held it out to
the little man. He took it and handed her the umbrella. He pocketed the po
und, raised his hat, gave a quick bow from the waist, and said, "Thank you,
madam, thank you." Then he was gone.
"Come under here and keep dry, darling," my mother said. "Aren't we lucky
. I've never had a silk umbrella before. I couldn't afford it."

"Why were you so horrid to him in the beginning?" I asked.
"I wanted to satisfy myself he wasn't a trickster," she said. "And I did.
He was a gentleman. I'm very pleased I was able to help him."
"Yes, mummy," I said.
"A real gentleman," she went on. "Wealthy, too, otherwise he wouldn't hav
e had a silk umbrella. I shouldn't be surprised if he isn't a titled person.
Sir Harry Goldsworthy or something like that."
"Yes, mummy."
"This will be a good lesson to you," she went on. "Never rush things.
Always take your time when you are summing someone up. Then you'll never
make mistakes."
"There he goes," I said. "Look."
"Where?"
"Over there. He's crossing the street. Goodness, mummy, what a hurry he'
s in."
We watched the little man as he dodged nimbly in and out of the traffic. W
hen he reached the other side of the street, he turned left, walking very fast
.
"He doesn't look very tired to me, does he to you, mummy?"
My mother didn't answer.
"He doesn't look as though he's trying to get a taxi, either," I said.
My mother was standing very still and stiff, staring across the street at
the little man. We could see him clearly. He was in a terrific hurry. He was
bustling along the pavement, sidestepping the other pedestrians and swinging
his arms like a soldier on the march.
"He's up to something," my mother said, stony-faced.
"But what?"
"I don't know," my mother snapped. "But I'm going to find out. Come wi
th me." She took my arm and we crossed the street together. Then we turned
left.
"Can you see him?" my mother asked.
"Yes. There he is. He's turning right down the next street." We came to
the corner and turned right. The little man was about twenty yards ahead of
us. He was scuttling along like a rabbit and we had to walk very fast to kee
p up with him. The rain was pelting down harder than ever now and I could se
e it dripping from the brim of his hat on to his shoulders. But we were snug
and dry under our lovely big silk umbrella.
"What is he up to?" my mother said.
"What if he turns round and sees us?" I asked.
"I don't care if he does," my mother said. "He lied to us. He said he was t
oo tired to walk any further and he's practically running us off our feet! He's
a barefaced liar! He's a crook!"

"You mean he's not a titled gentleman?" I asked.
"Be quiet," she said.
At the next crossing, the little man turned right again.
Then he turned left.
Then right.
"I'm not giving up now," my mother said.
"He's disappeared!" I cried. "Where's he gone?"
"He went in that door!" my mother said. "I saw him! Into that house! Grea
t heavens, it's a pub!"
It was a pub. In big letters right across the front it said THE RED LION.
"You're not going in are you, mummy?"
"No," she said. "We'll watch from outside."
There was a big plate-glass window along the front of the pub, and althou
gh it was a bit steamy on the inside, we could see through it very well if we
went close.
We stood huddled together outside the pub window. I was clutching my m
other's arm. The big raindrops were making a loud noise on our umbrella. "
There he is," I said. "Over there."
The room we were looking into was full of people and cigarette smoke, a
nd our little man was in the middle of it all. He was now without his hat a
nd coat, and he was edging his way through the crowd towards the bar. When
he reached it, he placed both hands on the bar itself and spoke to the barm
an. I saw his lips moving as he gave his order. The barman turned away from
him for a few seconds and came back with a smallish tumbler filled to the
brim with light brown liquid. The little man placed a pound note on the cou
nter.
"That's my pound!" my mother hissed. "By golly, he's got a nerve!"
"What's in the glass?" I asked.
"Whisky," my mother said. "Neat whisky."
The barman didn't give him any change from the pound.
"That must be a treble whisky," my mummy said.
"What's a treble?" I asked.
"Three times the normal measure," she answered.
The little man picked up the glass and put it to his lips. He tilted it gen
tly. Then he tilted it higher... and higher... and higher... and very soon all
the whisky had disappeared down his throat in one long pour. "That's a jolly ex
pensive drink," I said.
"It's ridiculous!" my mummy said. "Fancy paying a pound for something
to swallow in one go!"
"It cost him more than a pound," I said. "It cost him a twenty-pound silk
umbrella."
"So it did," my mother said. "He must be mad."

The little man was standing by the bar with the empty glass in his hand
. He was smiling now, and a sort of golden glow of pleasure was spreading o
ver his round pink face. I saw his tongue come out to lick the white mousta
che, as though searching for one last drop of that precious whisky.
Slowly, he turned away from the bar and edged his way back through the
crowd to where his hat and coat were hanging. He put on his hat. He put on
his coat. Then, in a manner so superbly cool and casual that you hardly not
iced anything at all, he lifted from the coat-rack one of the many wet umbr
ellas hanging there, and off he went.
"Did you see that!" my mother shrieked. "Did you see what he did!"
"Ssshh!" I whispered. "He's coming out!"
We lowered our umbrella to hide our faces, and peered out from under it.
Out he came. But he never looked in our direction. He opened his new u
mbrella over his head and scurried off down the road the way he had come.
"So that's his little game!" my mother said.
"Neat," I said. "Super." We followed him back to the main street where w
e had first met him, and we watched him as he proceeded, with no trouble at
all, to exchange his new umbrella for another pound note. This time it was w
ith a tall thin fellow who didn't even have a coat or hat. And as soon as th
e transaction was completed, our little man trotted off down the street and
was lost in the crowd. But this time he went in the opposite direction.
"You see how clever he is!" my mother said. "He never goes to the same
pub twice!"
"He could go on doing this all night," I said.
"Yes," my mother said. "Of course. But I'll bet he prays like mad for rain
y days."

Mr Botibol
MR BOTIBOL pushed his way through the revolving doors and emerged into the
large foyer of the hotel. He took off his hat, and holding it in front of
him with both hands, he advanced nervously a few paces, paused and stood
looking around him, searching the faces of the lunchtime crowd. Several pe
ople turned and stared at him in mild astonishment, and he heard--or he th
ought he heard--at least one woman's voice saying, "My dear, do look what'
s just come in!"
At last he spotted Mr Clements sitting at a small table in the far corn
er, and he hurried over to him. Clements had seen him coming, and now, as h
e watched Mr Botibol threading his way cautiously between the tables and th
e people, walking on his toes in such a meek and self-effacing manner and c

lutching his hat before him with both hands, he thought how wretched it mus
t be for any man to look as conspicuous and as odd as this Botibol. He rese
mbled, to an extraordinary degree, an asparagus. His long narrow stalk did
not appear to have any shoulders at all; it merely tapered upwards, growing
gradually narrower and narrower until it came to a kind of point at the to
p of the small bald head. He was tightly encased in a shiny blue double-bre
asted suit, and this, for some curious reason, accentuated the illusion of
a vegetable to a preposterous degree.
Clements stood up, they shook hands, and then at once, even before they
had sat down again, Mr Botibol said, "I have decided, yes I have decided t
o accept the offer which you made to me before you left my office last nigh
t."
For some days Clements had been negotiating, on behalf of clients, for
the purchase of the firm known as Botibol & Co., of which Mr Botibol was so
le owner, and the night before, Clements had made his first offer. This was
merely an exploratory, much-too-low bid, a kind of signal to the seller th
at the buyers were seriously interested. And by God, thought Clements, the
poor fool has gone and accepted it. He nodded gravely many times in an effo
rt to hide his astonishment, and he said, "Good, good. I'm so glad to hear
that, Mr Botibol." Then he signalled a waiter and said, "Two large martinis."
"No, please!" Mr Botibol lifted both hands in horrified protest.
"Come on," Clements said. "This is an occasion."
"I drink very little, and never, no never during the middle of the day."
But Clements was in a gay mood now and he took no notice. He ordered th
e martinis and when they came along Mr Botibol was forced, by the banter an
d good-humour of the other, to drink to the deal which had just been conclu
ded. Clements then spoke briefly about the drawing up and signing of docume
nts, and when all that had been arranged, he called for two more cocktails.
Again Mr Botibol protested, but not quite so vigorously this time, and Cle
ments ordered the drinks and then he turned and smiled at the other man in
a friendly way. "Well, Mr Botibol," he said, "now that it's all over, I sug
gest we have a pleasant non-business lunch together. What d'you say to that
? And it's on me."
"As you wish, as you wish," Mr Botibol answered without any enthusias
m. He had a small melancholy voice and a way of pronouncing each word sep
arately and slowly, as though he was explaining something to a child.
When they went into the dining-room Clements ordered a bottle of Lafite
1912 and a couple of plump roast partridges to go with it. He had already
calculated in his head the amount of his commission and he was feeling fine
. He began to make bright conversation, switching smoothly from one subject
to another in the hope of touching on something that might interest his gu
est. But it was no good. Mr Botibol appeared to be only half listening. Eve

ry now and then he inclined his small bald head a little to one side or the
other and said, "Indeed." When the wine came along Clements tried to have
a talk about that.
"I am sure it is excellent," Mr Botibol said, "but please give me only a dro
p."
Clements told a funny story. When it was over, Mr Botibol regarded him
solemnly for a few moments, then he said, "How amusing." After that Clement
s kept his mouth shut and they ate in silence. Mr Botibol was drinking his
wine and he didn't seem to object when his host reached over and refilled h
is glass. By the time they had finished eating, Clements estimated privatel
y that his guest had consumed at least three-quarters of the bottle.
"A cigar, Mr Botibol?"
"Oh no, thank you."
"A little brandy?"
"No really. I am not accustomed..
Clements noticed that the man's cheeks were slightly flushed and that hi
s eyes had become bright and watery. Might as well get the old boy properly
drunk while I'm about it, he thought, and to the waiter he said, "Two brandi
es."
When the brandies arrived, Mr Botibol looked at his large glass suspicio
usly for a while, then he picked it up, took one quick birdlike sip and put
it down again. "Mr Clements," he said suddenly, "how I envy you."
"Me? But why?"
"I will tell you, Mr Clements, I will tell you, if I may make so bold."
There was a nervous, mouselike quality in his voice which made it seem he wa
s apologizing for everything he said.
"Please tell me," Clements said.
"It is because to me you appear to have made such a success of your life."
He's going to get melancholy drunk, Clements thought. He's one of the one
s that gets melancholy and I can't stand it. "Success," he said, "I don't see
anything especially successful about me."
"Oh yes, indeed. Your whole life, if I may say so, Mr Clements, appears t
o be such a pleasant and successful thing."
"I'm a very ordinary person," Clements said. He was trying to figure just
how drunk the other really was.
"I believe," said Mr Botibol, speaking slowly, separating each word carefu
lly from the other, "I believe that the wine has gone a little to my head, but
... " He paused, searching for words. "... But I do want to ask you just one q
uestion." He had poured some salt on to the tablecloth and he was shaping it i
nto a little mountain with the tip of one finger.
"Mr Clements," he said without looking up, "do you think that it is possi

ble for a man to live to the age of fifty-two without ever during his whole l
ife having experienced one single small success in anything that he has done?
"
"My dear Mr Botibol," Clements laughed, "everyone has his little succes
ses from time to time, however small they may be."
"Oh no," Mr Botibol said gently. "You are wrong. I, for example, cannot
remember having had a single success of any sort during my whole life."
"Now come!" Clements said, smiling. "That can't be true. Why only this m
orning you sold your business for a hundred thousand. I call that one hell o
f a success."
"The business was left me by my father. When he died nine years ago, it
was worth four times as much. Under my direction it has lost three-quarters
of its value. You can hardly call that a success."
Clements knew this was true. "Yes, yes, all right," he said. "That may be
so, but all the same you know as well as I do that every man alive has his quo
ta of little successes. Not big ones maybe. But lots of little ones. I mean, a
fter all, goddammit, even scoring a goal at school was a little success, a lit
tle triumph, at the time; or making some runs or learning to swim. One forgets
about them, that's all. One just forgets."
"I never scored a goal," Mr Botibol said. "And I never learned to swim."
Clements threw up his hands and made exasperated noises. "Yes yes, I know
, but don't you see, don't you see there are thousands, literally thousands o
f other things like... well like catching a good fish, or fixing the motor of
the car, or pleasing someone with a present, or growing a decent row of Fren
ch beans, or winning a little bet or... or... why hell, one can go on listing
them for ever!"
"Perhaps you can, Mr Clements, but to the best of my knowledge, I have n
ever done any of those things. That is what I am trying to tell you."
Clements put down his brandy glass and stared with new interest at the
remarkable shoulderless person who sat facing him. He was annoyed and he
didn't feel in the least sympathetic. The man didn't inspire sympathy. He
was a fool. He must be a fool. A tremendous and absolute fool. Clements ha
d a sudden desire to embarrass the man as much as he could. "What about wo
men, Mr Botibol?" There was no apology for the question in the tone of his
voice.
"Women?"
"Yes women! Every man under the sun, even the most wretched filthy down
-and-out tramp has some time or other had some sort of silly little success
with... "Never!" cried Mr Botibol with sudden vigour. "No sir, never!"
I'm going to hit him, Clements told himself. I can't stand this any longe
r and if I'm not careful I'm going to jump right up and hit him. "You mean yo
u don't like them?" he said.

"Oh dear me yes, of course. I like them. As a matter of fact I admire th
em very much, very much indeed. But I'm afraid... oh dear me I do not know h
ow to say it... I am afraid that I do not seem to get along with them very w
ell. I never have. Never. You see, Mr Clements, I look queer. I know I do. T
hey stare at me, and often I see them laughing at me. I have never been able
to get within... well, within striking distance of them, as you might say."
The trace of a smile, weak and infinitely sad, flickered around the corners
of his mouth.
Clements had had enough. He mumbled something about how he was sure Mr
Botibol was exaggerating the situation, then he glanced at his watch, calle
d for the bill, and he said he was sorry but he would have to get back to t
he office.
They parted in the street outside the hotel and Mr Botibol took a cab bac
k to his house. He opened the front door, went into the living-room and switc
hed on the radio; then he sat down in a large leather chair, leaned back and
closed his eyes. He didn't feel exactly giddy, but there was a singing in his
ears and his thoughts were coming and going more quickly than usual. That so
licitor gave me too much wine, he told himself. I'll stay here for a while an
d listen to some music and I expect I'll go to sleep and after that I'll feel
better.
They were playing a symphony on the radio. Mr Botibol had always been a
casual listener to symphony concerts and he knew enough to identify this a
s one of Beethoven's. But now, as he lay back in his chair listening to the
marvellous music, a new thought began to expand slowly within his tipsy mi
nd. It wasn't a dream because he was not asleep. It was a clear conscious t
hought and it was this: I am the composer of this music. I am a great compo
ser. This is my latest symphony and this is the first performance. The huge
hall is packed with people--critics, musicians and music-lovers from all o
ver the country--and I am up there in front of the orchestra, conducting.
Mr Botibol could see the whole thing. He could see himself up on the ro
strum dressed in a white tie and tails, and before him was the orchestra, t
he massed violins on his left, the violas in front, the cellos on his right
, and back of them were all the woodwinds and bassoons and drums and cymbal
s, the players watching every moment of his baton with an intense, almost a
fanatical reverence. Behind him, in the half-darkness of the huge hail, wa
s row upon row of white enraptured faces, looking up towards him, listening
with growing excitement as yet another new symphony by the greatest compos
er the world has ever seen unfolded itself majestically before them. Some o
f the audience were clenching their fists and digging their nails into the
palms of their hands because the music was so beautiful that they could har
dly stand it. Mr Botibol became so carried away by this exciting vision tha
t he began to swing his arms in time with the music in the manner of a cond

uctor. He found it was such fun doing this that he decided to stand up, fac
ing the radio, in order to give himself more freedom of movement.
He stood there in the middle of the room, tall, thin and shoulderless,
dressed in his tight blue double-breasted suit, his small bald head jerking
from side to side as he waved his arms in the air. He knew the symphony we
ll enough to be able occasionally to anticipate changes in tempo or volume,
and when the music became loud and fast he beat the air so vigorously that
he nearly knocked himself over, when it was soft and hushed, he leaned for
ward to quieten the players with gentle movements of his outstretched hands
, and all the time he could feel the presence of the huge audience behind h
im, tense, immobile, listening. When at last the symphony swelled to its tr
emendous conclusion, Mr Botibol became more frenzied than ever and his face
seemed to thrust itself round to one side in an agony of effort as he trie
d to force more and still more power from his orchestra during those final
mighty chords.
Then it was over. The announcer was saying something, but Mr Botibol qu
ickly switched off the radio and collapsed into his chair, blowing heavily.
"Phew!" he said aloud. "My goodness gracious me, what have I been doing
!" Small globules of sweat were oozing out all over his face and forehead,
trickling down his neck inside his collar. He pulled out a handkerchief and
wiped them away, and he lay there for a while, panting, exhausted, but exc
eedingly exhilarated.
"Well, I must say," he gasped, still speaking aloud, "that was fun. I do
n't know that I have ever had such fun before in all my life. My goodness, i
t was fun, it really was!" Almost at once he began to play with the idea of
doing it again. But should he? Should he allow himself to do it again? There
was no denying that now, in retrospect, he felt a little guilty about the w
hole business, and soon he began to wonder whether there wasn't something do
wnright immoral about it all. Letting himself go like that! And imagining he
was a genius! It was wrong. He was sure other people didn't do it. And what
if Mason had come in the middle and seen him at it! That would have been te
rrible!
He reached for the paper and pretended to read it, but soon he was sear
ching furtively among the radio programmes for the evening. He put his fing
er under a line which said '8.30 Symphony Concert. Brahms Symphony No .2'.
He stared at it for a long time. The letters in the word 'Brahms' began to
blur and recede, and gradually they disappeared altogether and were replace
d by letters which spelt 'Botibol'. Botibol's Symphony No .2. It was printe
d quite clearly. He was reading it now, this moment. "Yes, yes," he whisper
ed. "First performance. The world is waiting to hear it. Will it be as grea
t, they are asking, will it perhaps be greater than his earlier work? And t
he composer himself had been persuaded to conduct. He is shy and retiring,

hardly ever appears in public, but on this occasion he has been persuaded..
Mr Botibol leaned forward in his chair and pressed the bell beside the fi
replace. Mason, the butler, the only other person in the house, ancient, smal
l and grave, appeared at the door.
"Er... Mason, have we any wine in the house?"
"Wine, sir?"
"Yes, wine."
"Oh no, sir. We haven't had any wine this fifteen or sixteen years. Your fat
her, sir..
"I know, Mason, I know, but will you get some please. I want a bottle wi
th my dinner."
The butler was shaken. "Very well, sir, and what shall it be?"
"Claret, Mason. The best you can obtain. Get a case. Tell them to send it
round at once."
When he was alone again, he was momentarily appalled by the simple man
ner in which he had made his decision. Wine for dinner! Just like that! We
ll, yes, why not? Why ever not now he came to think of it? He was his own
master. And anyway it was essential that he have wine. It seemed to have a
good effect, a very good effect indeed. He wanted it and he was going to
have it and to hell with Mason.
He rested for the remainder of the afternoon, and at seven-thirty Mason
announced dinner. The bottle of wine was on the table and he began to drin
k it. He didn't give a damn about the way Mason watched him as he refilled
his glass. Three times he refilled it; then he left the table saying that h
e was not to be disturbed and returned to the living-room. There was quarte
r of an hour to wait. He could think of nothing now except the coming conce
rt. He lay back in the chair and allowed his thoughts to wander deliciously
towards eight-thirty. He was the great composer waiting impatiently in his
dressing-room in the concert-hall. He could hear in the distance the murmu
r of excitement from the crowd as they settled themselves in their seats. H
e knew what they were saying to each other. Same sort of thing the newspape
rs had been saying for months. Botibol is a genius, greater, far greater th
an Beethoven or Bach or Brahms or Mozart or any of them. Each new work of h
is is more magnificent than the last. What will the next one be like? We ca
n hardly wait to hear it! Oh yes, he knew what they were saying. He stood u
p and began to pace the room. It was nearly time now. He seized a pencil fr
om the table to use as a baton, then he switched on the radio. The announce
r had just finished the preliminaries and suddenly there was a burst of app
lause which meant that the conductor was coming on to the platform. The pre
vious concert in the afternoon had been from gramophone records, but this o
ne was the real thing. Mr Botibol turned around, faced the fireplace and bo
wed graciously from the waist. Then he turned back to the radio and lifted

his baton. The clapping stopped. There was a moment's silence. Someone in t
he audience coughed. Mr Botibol waited. The symphony began.
Once again, as he began to conduct, he could see clearly before him the
whole orchestra and the faces of the players and even the expressions on t
heir faces. Three of the violinists had grey hair. One of the cellists was
very fat, another wore heavy brown-rimmed glasses, and there was a man in t
he second row playing a horn who had a twitch on one side of his face. But
they were all magnificent. And so was the music. During certain impressive
passages Mr Botibol experienced a feeling of exultation so powerful that it
made him cry out for joy, and once during the Third Movement, a little shi
ver of ecstasy radiated spontaneously from his solar plexus and moved downw
ard over the skin of his stomach like needles. But the thunderous applause
and the cheering which came at the end of the symphony was the most splendi
d thing of all. He turned slowly towards the fireplace and bowed. The clapp
ing continued and he went on bowing until at last the noise died away and t
he announcer's voice jerked him suddenly back into the living-room. He swit
ched off the radio and collapsed into his chair, exhausted but very happy.
As he lay there, smiling with pleasure, wiping his wet face, panting fo
r breath, he was already making plans for his next performance. But why not
do it properly? Why not convert one of the rooms into a sort of concert-ha
ll and have a stage and row of chairs and do the thing properly? And have a
gramophone so that one could perform at any time without having to rely on
the radio programme. Yes by heavens, he would do it!
The next morning Mr Botibol arranged with a firm of decorators that the
largest room in the house be converted into a miniature concert-hall. Ther
e was to be a raised stage at one end and the rest of the floor-space was t
o be filled with rows of red plush seats. "I'm going to have some little co
ncerts here," he told the man from the firm, and the man nodded and said th
at would be very nice. At the same time he ordered a radio shop to instal a
n expensive self-changing gramophone with two powerful amplifiers, one on t
he stage, the other at the back of the auditorium. When he had done this, h
e went off and bought all of Beethoven's nine symphonies on gramophone reco
rds, and from a place which specialized in recorded sound effects he ordere
d several records of clapping and applauding by enthusiastic audiences. Fin
ally he bought himself a conductor's baton, a slim ivory stick which lay in
a case lined with blue silk.
In eight days the room was ready. Everything was perfect; the red chairs,
the aisle down the centre and even a little dais on the platform with a brass
rail running round it for the conductor. Mr Botibol decided to give the first
concert that evening after dinner.
At seven o'clock he went up to his bedroom and changed into white tie an
d tails. He felt marvellous. When he looked at himself in the mirror, the si

ght of his own grotesque shoulderless figure didn't worry him in the least.
A great composer, he thought, smiling, can look as he damn well pleases. Peo
ple expect him to look peculiar. All the same he wished he had some hair on
his head. He would have liked to let it grow rather long. He went downstairs
to dinner, ate his food rapidly, drank half a bottle of wine and felt bette
r still. "Don't worry about me, Mason," he said. "I'm not mad. I'm just enjo
ying myself."
"Yes, sir."
"I shan't want you any more. Please see that I'm not disturbed." Mr Bot
ibol went from the dining-room into the miniature concert-hall. He took out
the records of Beethoven's First Symphony, but before putting them on the
gramophone, he placed two other records with them. The one, which was to be
played first of all, before the music began, was labelled 'prolonged enthu
siastic applause'. The other, which would come at the end of the symphony,
was labelled 'Sustained applause, clapping, cheering, shouts of encore'. By
a simple mechanical device on the record changer, the gramophone people ha
d arranged that the sound from the first and the last records--the applause
--would come only from the loudspeaker in the auditorium. The sound from al
l the others--the music--would come from the speaker hidden among the chair
s of the orchestra. When he had arranged the records in the concert order,
he placed them on the machine but he didn't switch on at once. Instead he t
urned out all the lights in the room except one small one which lit up the
conductor's dais and he sat down in the chair up on the stage, closed his e
yes and allowed his thoughts to wander into the usual delicious regions; th
e great composer, nervous, impatient, waiting to present his latest masterp
iece, the audience assembling, the murmur of their excited talk, and so on.
Having dreamed himself right into the part, he stood up, picked up his bat
on and switched on the gramophone.
A tremendous wave of clapping filled the room. Mr Botibol walked acros
s the stage, mounted the dais, faced the audience and bowed. In the darkne
ss he could just make out the faint outline of the seats on either side of
the centre aisle, but he couldn't see the faces of the people. They were
making enough noise. What an ovation! Mr Botibol turned and faced the orch
estra. The applause behind him died down. The next record dropped. The sym
phony began.
This time it was more thrilling than ever, and during the performance h
e registered any number of prickly sensations around his solar plexus. Once
, when it suddenly occurred to him that the music was being broadcast all o
ver the world, a sort of shiver ran right down the length of his spine. But
by far the most exciting part was the applause which came at the end. They
cheered and clapped and stamped and shouted encore! encore! encore! and he
turned towards the darkened auditorium and bowed gravely to the left and r

ight. Then he went off the stage, but they called him back. He bowed severa
l more times and went off again, and again they, called him back. The audie
nce had gone mad. They simply wouldn't let him go. It was terrific. It was
truly a terrific ovation.
Later, when he was resting in his chair in the other room, he was still en
joying it. He closed his eyes because he didn't want anything to break the spe
ll. He lay there and he felt like he was floating. It was really a most marvel
lous floating feeling, and when he went upstairs and undressed and got into be
d, it was still with him.
The following evening he conducted Beethoven's--or rather Botibol's--Se
cond Symphony, and they were just as mad about that one as the first. The n
ext few nights he played one symphony a night, and at the end of nine eveni
ngs he had worked through all nine of Beethoven's symphonies. It got more e
xciting every time because before each concert the audience kept saying, 'H
e can't do it again, not another masterpiece. It's not humanly possible.' B
ut he did. They were all of them equally magnificent. The last symphony, th
e Ninth, was especially exciting because here the composer surprised and de
lighted everyone by suddenly providing a choral masterpiece. He had to cond
uct a huge choir as well as the orchestra itself, and Benjamino Gigli had f
lown over from Italy to take the tenor part. Enrico Pinza sang bass. At the
end of it the audience shouted themselves hoarse. The whole musical world
was on its feet cheering, and on all sides they were saying how you never c
ould tell what wonderful things to expect next from this amazing person.
The composing, presenting and conducting of nine great symphonies in a
s many days is a fair achievement for any man, and it was not astonishing
that it went a little to Mr Botibol's head. He decided now that he would o
nce again surprise his public. He would compose a mass of marvellous piano
music and he himself would give the recitals. So early the next morning h
e set out for the show room of the people who sold Bechsteins and Steinway
s. He felt so brisk and fit that he walked all the way, and as he walked h
e hummed little snatches of new and lovely tunes for the piano. His head w
as full of them. All the time they kept coming to him and once, suddenly,
he had the feeling the thousands of small notes, some white, some black, w
ere cascading down a chute into his head through a hole in his head, and t
hat his brain, his amazing musical brain, was receiving them as fast as th
ey could come and unscrambling them and arranging them neatly in a certain
order so that they made wondrous melodies. There were Nocturnes, there we
re Etudes and there were Waltzes, and soon, he told himself, soon he would
give them all to a grateful and admiring world. When he arrived at the pi
ano-shop, he pushed the door open and walked in with an air almost of conf
idence.. He had changed much in the last few days. Some of his nervousness
had left him and he was no longer wholly preoccupied with what others tho

ught of his appearance. "I want," he said to the salesman, "a concert gran
d, but you must arrange it so that when the notes are struck, no sound is produced."
The salesman leaned forward and raised his eyebrows.
"Could that be arranged?" Mr Botibol asked.
"Yes, sir, I think so, if you desire it. But might I inquire what you intend
to use the instrument for?"
"If you want to know, I'm going to pretend I'm Chopin. I'm going to sit
and play while a gramophone makes the music. It gives me a kick." It came
out, just like that, and Mr Botibol didn't know what had made him say it. B
ut it was done now and he had said it and that was that. In a way he felt r
elieved, because he had proved he didn't mind telling people what he was do
ing. The man would probably answer what a jolly good idea. Or he might not.
He might say well you ought to be locked up.
"So now you know," Mr Botibol said.
The salesman laughed out loud. "Ha ha! Ha ha ha! That's very good, sir.
Very good indeed. Serves me right for asking silly questions." He stopped su
ddenly in the middle of the laugh and looked hard at Mr Botibol. "Of course,
sir, you probably know that we sell a simple noiseless keyboard specially f
or silent practising."
"I want a concert grand," Mr Botibol said. The salesman looked at him ag
ain.
Mr Botibol chose his piano and got out of the shop as quickly as possib
le. He went on to the store that sold gramophone records and there he order
ed a quantity of albums containing recordings of all Chopin's Nocturnes, Et
udes and Waltzes, played by Arthur Rubinstein.
"My goodness, you are going to have a lovely time!"
Mr Botibol turned and saw standing beside him at the counter a squat, sho
rt-legged girl with a face as plain as a pudding.
"Yes," he answered. "Oh yes, I am." Normally he was strict about not spe
aking to females in public places, but this one had taken him by surprise.
"I love Chopin," the girl said. She was holding a slim brown paper bag wi
th string handles containing a single record she had just bought. "I like him
better than any of the others."
It was comforting to hear the voice of this girl after the way the piano
salesman had laughed. Mr Botibol wanted to talk to her but he didn't know wha
t to say.
The girl said, "I like the Nocturnes best, they're so soothing. Which are y
our favourites?"
Mr Botibol said, "Well... " The girl looked up at him and she smiled ple
asantly, trying to assist with his embarrassment. It was the smile that did
it. He suddenly found himself saying, "Well now, perhaps, would you, I wonde
r... I mean I was wondering... " She smiled again; she couldn't help it this

time. "What I mean is I would be glad if you would care to come along some
time and listen to these records."
"Why how nice of you." She paused, wondering whether it was all right.
"You really mean it?"
"Yes, I should be glad."
She had lived long enough in the city to discover that old men, if they
are dirty old men, do not bother about trying to pick up a girl as unattract
ive as herself. Only twice in her life had she been accosted in public and e
ach time the man had been drunk. But this one wasn't drunk. He was nervous a
nd he was peculiar-looking, but he wasn't drunk. Come to think of it, it was
she who had started the conversation in the first place. "It would be lovel
y," she said. "It really would. When could I come?"
Oh dear, Mr Botibol thought. Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear, oh dear.
"I could come tomorrow," she went on. "It's my afternoon off."
"Well, yes, certainly," he answered slowly. "Yes, of course. I'll give you m
y card. Here it is."
"A. W. Botibol," she read aloud. "What a funny name. Mine's Darlington
. Miss L. Darlington. How d'you do, Mr Botibol." She put out her hand for
him to shake. "Oh I am looking forward to this! What time shall I come?"
"Any time," he said. "Please come any time."
"Three o'clock?"
"Yes. Three o'clock."
"Lovely! I'll be there."
He watched her walk out of the shop, a squat, stumpy, thick-legged litt
le person and my word, he thought, what have I done! He was amazed at himse
lf. But he was not displeased. Then at once he started to worry about wheth
er or not he should let her see his concert-hall. He worried still more whe
n he realized that it was the only place in the house where there was a gra
mophone.
That evening he had no concert. Instead he sat in his chair brooding ab
out Miss Darlington and what he should do when she arrived. The next mornin
g they brought the piano, a fine Bechstein in dark mahogany which was carri
ed in minus its legs and later assembled on the platform in the concert hal
l. It was an imposing instrument and when Mr Botibol opened it and pressed
a note with his finger, it made no sound at all. He had originally intended
to astonish the world with a recital of his first piano compositions--a se
t of Etudes--as soon as the piano arrived, but it was no good now. He was t
oo worried about Miss Darlington and three o'clock. At lunch-time his trepi
dation had increased and he couldn't eat. "Mason," he said, "I'm, I'm expec
ting a young lady to call at three o'clock."
"A what, sir?" the butler said.
"A young lady, Mason."

"Very good, sir."
"Show her into the sitting-room."
"Yes, sir."
Precisely at three he heard the bell ring. A few moments later Mason w
as showing her into the room. She came in, smiling, and Mr Botibol stood u
p and shook her hand. "My!" she exclaimed. "What a lovely house! I didn't
know I was calling on a millionaire!"
She settled her small plump body into a large armchair and Mr Botibol sat
opposite. He didn't know what to say. He felt terrible. But almost at once s
he began to talk and she chattered away gaily about this and that for a long
time without stopping. Mostly it was about his house and the furniture and th
e carpets and about how nice it was of him to invite her because she didn't h
ave such an awful lot of excitement in her life. She worked hard all day and
she shared a room with two other girls in a boarding-house and he could have
no idea how thrilling it was for her to be here. Gradually Mr Botibol began t
o feel better. He sat there listening to the girl, rather liking her, nodding
his bald head slowly up and down, and the more she talked, the more he liked
her. She was gay and chatty, but underneath all that any fool could see that
she was a lonely tired little thing. Even Mr Botibol could see that. He coul
d see it very clearly indeed. It was at this point that he began to play with
a daring and risky idea.
"Miss Darlington," he said. "I'd like to show you something." He led her ou
t of the room straight to the little concert-hall. "Look," he said.
She stopped just inside the door. "My goodness! Just look at that! A thea
tre! A real little theatre!" Then she saw the piano on the platform and the c
onductor's dais with the brass rail running round it. "It's for concerts!" sh
e cried. "Do you really have concerts here! Oh, Mr Botibol, how exciting!"
"Do you like it?"
"Oh yes!"
"Come back into the other room and I'll tell you about it." Her enthusi
asm had given him confidence and he wanted to get going. "Come back and lis
ten while I tell you something funny." And when they were seated in the sit
ting-room again, he began at once to tell her his story. He told the whole
thing, right from the beginning, how one day, listening to a symphony, he h
ad imagined himself to be the composer, how he had stood up and started to
conduct, how he had got an immense pleasure out of it, how he had done it a
gain with similar results and how finally he had built himself the concerthall where already he had conducted nine symphonies. But he cheated a littl
e bit in the telling. He said that the only real reason he did it was in or
der to obtain the maximum appreciation from the music. There was only one w
ay to listen to music, he told her, only one way to make yourself listen to
every single note and chord. You had to do two things at once. You had to

imagine that you had composed it, and at the same time you had to imagine t
hat the public were hearing it for the first time. "Do you think," he said,
"do you really think that any outsider has ever got half as great a thrill
from a symphony as the composer himself when he first heard his work playe
d by a full orchestra?"
"No," she answered timidly. "Of course not."
"Then become the composer! Steal his music! Take it away from him and g
ive it to yourself!" He leaned back in his chair and for the first time she
saw him smile. He had only just thought of this new complex explanation of
his conduct, but to him it seemed a very good one and he smiled. "Well, wh
at do you think, Miss Darlington?"
"I must say it's very very interesting." She was polite and puzzled but
she was a long way away from him now.
"Would you like to try?"
"Oh no. Please."
"I wish you would."
"I'm afraid I don't think I should be able to feel the same way as you do
about it, Mr Botibol. I don't think I have a strong enough imagination."
She could see from his eyes he was disappointed. "But I'd love to sit in t
he audience and listen while you do it," she added.
Then he leapt up from his chair. "I've got it!" he cried. "A piano conce
rto! You play the piano, I conduct. You the greatest pianist, the greatest i
n the world. First performance of my Piano Concerto No .1. You playing, me c
onducting. The greatest pianist and the greatest composer together for the f
irst time. A tremendous occasion! The audience will go mad! There'll be queu
eing all night outside the hall to get in. It'll be broadcast around the wor
ld. It'll, it'll... " Mr Botibol stopped. He stood behind the chair with bot
h hands resting on the back of the chair and suddenly he looked embarrassed
and a trifle sheepish. "I'm sorry," he said, "I get worked up. You see how i
t is. Even the thought of another performance gets me worked up." And then p
laintively, "Would you, Miss Darlington, would you play a piano concerto wit
h me?"
"It's like children," she said, but she smiled.
"No one will know. No one but us will know anything about it."
"All right," she said at last. "I'll do it. I think I'm daft but just the same I'll
do it. It'll be a bit of a lark."
"Good!" Mr Botibol cried. "When? Tonight?"
"Oh well, I don't..
"Yes," he said eagerly. "Please. Make it tonight. Come back and have d
inner here with me and we'll give the concert afterwards." Mr Botibol was
excited again now. "We must make a few plans. Which is your favourite pian
o concerto, Miss Darlington?"

"Oh well, I should say Beethoven's Emperor."
"The Emperor it shall be. You will play it tonight. Come to dinner at se
ven. Evening dress. You must have evening dress for the concert."
"I've got a dancing dress but I haven't worn it for years."
"You shall wear it tonight." He paused and looked at her in silence for a
moment, then quite gently, he said, "You're not worried, Miss Darlington? Pe
rhaps you would rather not do it. I'm afraid, I'm afraid I've let myself get
rather carried away. I seem to have pushed you into this. And I know how stup
id it must seem to you." That's better, she thought. That's much better. Now
I know it's all right. "Oh no," she said. "I'm really looking forward to it.
But you frightened me a bit, taking it all so seriously."
When she had gone, he waited for five minutes, then went out into the t
own to the gramophone shop and bought the records of the Emperor Concerto,
conductor, Toscanini--soloist, Horowitz. He returned at once, told his asto
nished butler that there would be a guest for dinner, then went upstairs an
d changed into his tails.
She arrived at seven. She was wearing a long sleeveless dress made of s
ome shiny green material and to Mr Botibol she did not look quite so plump
or quite so plain as before. He took her straight in to dinner and in spite
of the silent disapproving manner in which Mason prowled around the table,
the meal went well. She protested gaily when Mr Botibol gave her a second
glass of wine, but she didn't refuse it. She chattered away almost without
a stop throughout the three courses and Mr Botibol listened and nodded and
kept refilling her glass as soon as it was half empty.
Afterwards, when they were seated in the living-room, Mr Botibol said,
"Now Miss Darlington, now we begin to fall into our parts." The wine, as us
ual, had made him happy, and the girl, who was even less used to it than th
e man, was not feeling so bad either. "You, Miss Darlington, are the great
pianist. What is your first name, Miss Darlington?"
"Lucille," she said. "The great pianist Lucille Darlington. I am the com
poser Botibol. We must talk and act and think as though we are pianist and c
omposer."
"What is your first name, Mr Botibol? What does the A stand for?"
"Angel," he answered.
"Not Angel."
"Yes," he said irritably.
"Angel Botibol," she murmured and she began to giggle. But she checked h
erself and said, "I think it's a most unusual and distinguished name."
"Are you ready, Miss Darlington?"
"Yes."
Mr Botibol stood up and began pacing nervously up and down the room. H
e looked at his watch. "It's nearly time to go on," he said. "They tell me

the place is packed. Not an empty seat anywhere. I always get nervous bef
ore a concert. Do you get nervous, Miss Darlington?"
"Oh yes, I do, always. Especially playing with you."
"I think they'll like it. I put everything I've got into this concerto, Miss
Darlington. It nearly killed me composing it. I was ill for weeks afterwards."
"Poor you," she said.
"It's time now," he said. "The orchestra are all in their places. Come
on." He led her out and down the passage, then he made her wait outside t
he door of the concert-hall while he nipped in, arranged the lighting and
switched on the gramophone. He came back and fetched her and as they walke
d on to the stage, the applause broke out. They both stood and bowed towar
ds the darkened auditorium and the applause was vigorous and it went on fo
r a long time. Then Mr Botibol mounted the dais and Miss Darlington took h
er seat at the piano. The applause died down. Mr Botibol held up his baton
. The next record dropped and the Emperor Concerto began.
It was an astonishing affair. The thin stalk-like Mr Botibol, who had n
o shoulders, standing on the dais in his evening clothes waving his arms ab
out in approximate time to the music; and the plump Miss Darlington in her
shiny green dress seated at the keyboard of the enormous piano thumping the
silent keys with both hands for all she was worth. She recognized the pass
ages where the piano was meant to be silent, and on these occasions she fol
ded her hands primly on her lap and stared straight ahead with a dreamy and
enraptured expression on her face. Watching her, Mr Botibol thought that s
he was particularly wonderful in the slow solo passages of the Second Movem
ent. She allowed her hands to drift smoothly and gently up and down the key
s and she inclined her head first to one side, then to the other, and once
she closed her eyes for a long time while she played. During the exciting l
ast movement, Mr Botibol himself lost his balance and would have fallen off
the platform had he not saved himself by clutching the brass rail. But in
spite of everything, the concerto moved on majestically to its mighty concl
usion. Then the real clapping came. Mr Botibol walked over and took Miss Da
rlington by the hand and led her to the edge of the platform, and there the
y stood, the two of them, bowing, and bowing, and bowing again as the clapp
ing and the shouting of 'encore' continued. Four times they left the stage
and came back, and then, the fifth time, Mr Botibol whispered, "It's you th
ey want. You take this one alone."
"No," she said. "It's you. Please." But he pushed her forward and she t
ook her call, and came back and said, "Now you. They want you. Can't you he
ar them shouting for you?" So Mr Botibol walked alone on to the stage, bowe
d gravely to right, left and centre and came off just as the clapping stopp
ed altogether.
He led her straight back to the living-room. He was breathing fast and th

e sweat was pouring down all over his face. She too was a little breathless,
and her cheeks were shining red.
"A tremendous performance, Miss Darlington. Allow me to congratulate
you."
"But what a concerto, Mr Botibol! What a superb concerto!"
"You played it perfectly, Miss Darlington. You have a real feeling fo
r my music." He was wiping the sweat from his face with a handkerchief. "
And tomorrow we perform my Second Concerto."
"Tomorrow?"
"Of course. Had you forgotten, Miss Darlington? We are booked to appea
r together for a whole week."
"Oh... oh yes... I'm afraid I had forgotten that."
"But it's all right, isn't it?" he asked anxiously. "After hearing you toni
ght I could not bear to have anyone else play my music."
"I think it's all right," she said. "Yes, I think that'll be all right." She
looked at the clock on the mantelpiece. "My heavens, it's late! I must go! I'll n
ever get up in the morning to get to work!"
"To work?" Mr Botibol said. "To work?" Then slowly, reluctantly, he forc
ed himself back to reality. "Ah yes, to work. Of course, you have to get to
work."
"I certainly do."
"Where do you work, Miss Darlington?"
"Me? Well," and now she hesitated a moment, looking at Mr Botibol. "As
a matter of fact I work at the old Academy."
"I hope it is pleasant work," he said. "What Academy is that?"
"I teach the piano."
Mr Botibol jumped as though someone had stuck him from behind with a
hatpin. His mouth opened very wide.
"It's quite all right," she said, smiling. "I've always wanted to be Horo
witz. And could I, do you think, could I please be Schnabel tomorrow?"
Vengeance is Mine Inc.
IT was snowing when I woke up.
I could tell that it was snowing because there was a kind of brightness
in the room and it was quiet outside with no footstep-noises coming up from
the street and no tyre-noises but only the engines of the cars. I looked up
and I saw George over by the window in his green dressing-gown, bending over
the paraffin-stove, making the coffee.
"Snowing," I said.
"It's cold," George answered. "It's really cold."
I got out of bed and fetched the morning paper from outside the door. It
was cold all right and I ran back quickly and jumped into bed and lay still
for a while under the bedclothes, holding my hands tight between my legs fo

r warmth.
"No letters?" George said.
"No. No letters."
"Doesn't look as if the old man's going to cough up."
"Maybe he thinks four hundred and fifty is enough for one month," I said.
"He's never been to New York. He doesn't know the cost of living here."
"You shouldn't have spent it all in one week."
George stood up and looked at me. "We shouldn't have spent it, you mean
."
"That's right," I said. "We." I began reading the paper.
The coffee was ready now and George brought the pot over and put it on t
he table between our beds. "A person can't live without money," he said. "Th
e old man ought to know that." He got back into his bed without taking off h
is green dressing-gown. I went on reading. I finished the racing page and th
e football page and then I started on Lionel Pantaloon, the great political
and society columnist. I always read Pantaloon--same as the other twenty or
thirty million other people in the country. He's a habit with me; he's more
than a habit; he's part of my morning, like three cups of coffee, or shaving.
"This fellow's got a nerve," I said.
"Who?"
"This Lionel Pantaloon."
"What's he saying now?"
"Same sort of thing he's always saying. Same sort of scandal. Always a
bout the rich. Listen to this: '... seen at the Penguin Club... banker Wil
liam S. Womberg with beauteous starlet Theresa Williams... three nights ru
nning... Mrs Womberg at home with a headache... which is something anyone'
s wife would have if hubby was out squiring Miss Williams of an evening...
"That fixes Womberg," George said.
"I think it's a shame," I said. "That sort of thing could cause a divorce.
How can this Pantaloon get away with stuff like that?"
"He always does, they're all scared of him. But if I was William S. Wom
berg," George said, "you know what I'd do? I'd go right out and punch this
Lionel Pantaloon right on the nose. Why, that's the only way to handle thos
e guys."
"Mr Womberg couldn't do that."
"Why not?"
"Because he's an old man," I said. "Mr Womberg is a dignified and respec
table old man. He's a very prominent banker in the town. He couldn't possibl
y... "
And then it happened. Suddenly, from nowhere, the idea came. It came to
me in the middle of what I was saying to George and I stopped short and I

could feel the idea itself kind of flowing into my brain and I kept very qu
iet and let it come and it kept on coming and almost before I knew what had
happened I had it all, the whole plan, the whole brilliant magnificent pla
n worked out clearly in my head; and right then I knew it was a beauty.
I turned and I saw George staring at me with a look of wonder on his fac
e. "What's wrong?" he said. "What's the matter?"
I kept quite calm. I reached out and got myself some more coffee before
I allowed myself to speak.
"George," I said, and I still kept calm. "I have an idea. Now listen very
carefully because I have an idea which will make us both very rich. We are b
roke, are we not?"
"We are."
"And this William S. Womberg," I said, "would you consider that he is
angry with Lionel Pantaloon this morning?"
"Angry!" George shouted. "Angry! Why, he'll be madder than hell!"
"Quite so. And do you think that he would like to see Lionel Pantaloon
receive a good hard punch on the nose?"
"Damn right he would!"
"And now tell me, is it not possible that Mr Womberg would be prepared
to pay a sum of money to someone who would undertake to perform this nose
-punching operation efficiently and discreetly on his behalf?"
George turned and looked at me, and gently, carefully, he put down his co
ffee-cup on the table. A slowly widening smile began to spread across his fac
e. "I get you," he said. "I get the idea."
"That's just a little part of the idea. If you read Pantaloon's column her
e you will see that there is another person who has been insulted today." I pi
cked up the paper. "There is a Mrs Ella Gimple, a prominent socialite who has
perhaps a million dollars in the bank..
"What does Pantaloon say about her?"
I looked at the paper again. "He hints," I answered, "at how she makes a
stack of money out of her own friends by throwing roulette parties and acti
ng as the bank."
"That fixes Gimple," George said. "And Womberg. Gimple and Womberg."
He was sitting up straight in bed waiting for me to go on.
"Now," I said, "we have two different people both loathing Lionel Panta
loon's guts this morning, both wanting desperately to go out and punch him
on the nose, and neither of them daring to do it. You understand that?"
"Absolutely."
"So much then," I said, "for Lionel Pantaloon. But don't forget that th
ere are others like him. There are dozens of other columnists who spend the
ir time insulting wealthy and important people. There's Harry Weyman, Claud
e Taylor, Jacob Swinski, Walter Kennedy, and the rest of them."

"That's right," George said. "That's absolutely right."
"I'm telling you, there's nothing that makes the rich so furious as being
mocked and insulted in the newspapers."
"Go on," George said. "Go on."
"All right. Now this is the plan." I was getting rather excited myself. I w
as leaning over the side of the bed, resting one hand on the little table, wavi
ng the other about in the air as I spoke. "We will set up immediately an organi
zation and we will call it... what shall we call it we will call it... let me s
ee... we will call it 'Vengeance Is Mine Inc.'... How about that?"
"Peculiar name."
"It's biblical. It's good. I like it. 'Vengeance Is Mine Inc.' It sounds
fine. And we will have little cards printed which we will send to all our cli
ents reminding them that they have been insulted and mortified in public and
offering to punish the offender in consideration of a sum of money. We will b
uy all the newspapers and read all the columnists and every day we will send
out a dozen or more of our cards to prospective clients."
"It's marvellous!" George shouted. "It's terrific!"
"We shall be rich," I told him. "We shall be exceedingly wealthy in no time
at all."
"We must start at once!"
I jumped out of bed, fetched a writing-pad and a pencil and ran back to
bed again. "Now," I said, pulling my knees under the blankets and propping
the writing-pad against them, "the first thing is to decide what we're goi
ng to say on the printed cards which we'll be sending to our clients," and
I wrote, 'VENGEANCE IS MINE INC.' as a heading on the top of the sheet of p
aper. Then, with much care, I composed a finely phrased letter explaining t
he functions of the organization. It finished up with the following sentenc
e: 'Therefore VENGEANCE IS MINE INC. will undertake, on your behalf and in
absolute confidence, to administer suitable punishment to columnist and in
this regard we respectfully submit to you a choice of methods (together wit
h prices) for your consideration."
"What do you mean, 'a choice of methods'?" George said.
"We must give them a choice. We must think up a number of things... a n
umber of different punishments. Number one will be... " and I wrote down, '
i. Punch him on the nose, once, hard.' "What shall we charge for that?"
"Five hundred dollars," George said instantly.
I wrote it down. "What's the next one?"
"Black his eye," George said.
I wrote it down, '2. Black his eye... $500.'
"No!" George said. "I disagree with the price. It definitely requires more
skill and timing to black an eye nicely than to punch a nose. It is a skilled j
ob. It should be six hundred."

"OK," I said. "Six hundred. And what's the next one?"
"Both together, of course. The old one two." We were in George's territor
y now. This was right up his street.
"Both together?"
"Absolutely. Punch his nose and black his eye. Eleven hundred dollars."
"There should be a reduction for taking the two," I said. "We'll make it a
thousand."
"It's dirt cheap," George said. "They'll snap it up."
"What's next?"
We were both silent now, concentrating fiercely. Three deep parallel gro
oves of skin appeared upon George's rather low sloping forehead. He began to
scratch his scalp, slowly but very strongly. I looked away and tried to thi
nk of all the terrible things which people had done to other people. Finally
, I got one, and with George watching the point of my pencil moving over the
paper, I wrote: '4. Put a rattlesnake (with venom extracted) on the floor o
f his car, by the pedals, when he parks it.'
"Jesus Christ!" George whispered. "You want to kill him with fright!"
"Sure," I said.
"And where'd you get a rattlesnake, anyway?"
"Buy it. You can always buy them. How much shall we charge for that on
e?"
"Fifteen hundred dollars," George said firmly. I wrote it down.
"Now we need one more."
"Here it is," George said. "Kidnap him in a car, take all his clothes aw
ay except his underpants and his shoes and socks, then dump him out on Fifth
Avenue in the rush hour." He smiled, a broad triumphant smile.
"We can't do that."
"Write it down. And charge two thousand five hundred bucks. You'd do it
all right if old Womberg were to offer you that much."
"Yes," I said. "I suppose I would." And I wrote it down. "That's enough
now," I added. "That gives them a wide choice."
"And where will we get the cards printed?" George asked.
"George Karnoffsky," I said. "Another George. He's a friend of mine. Run
s a small printing shop down on Third Avenue. Does wedding invitations and t
hings like that for all the big stores. He'll do it. I know he will."
"Then what are we waiting for?"
We both leapt out of bed and began to dress. "It's twelve o'clock," I said.
"If we hurry we'll catch him before he goes to lunch."
It was still snowing when we went out into the street and the snow was
four or five inches thick on the sidewalk, but we covered the fourteen bloc
ks to Karnoffsky's shop at a tremendous pace and we arrived there just as h
e was putting his coat on to go out. "Claude!" he shouted. "Hi boy! How you

been keeping," and he pumped my hand. He had a fat friendly face and a ter
rible nose with great wide-open nose-wings which overlapped his cheeks by a
t least an inch on either side. I greeted him and told him that we had come
to discuss some most urgent business. He took off his coat and led us back
into the office, then I began to tell him our plans and what we wanted him
to do.
When I'd got about quarter way through my story, he started to roar wit
h laughter and it was impossible for me to continue; so I cut it short and
handed him the piece of paper with the stuff on it that we wanted him to pr
int. And now, as he read it, his whole body began to shake with laughter an
d he kept slapping the desk with his hand and coughing and choking and roar
ing like someone crazy. We sat watching him. We didn't see anything particu
lar to laugh about.
Finally he quietened down and he took out a handkerchief and made a grea
t business about wiping his eyes. "Never laughed so much," he said weakly. "
That's a great joke, that is. It's worth a lunch. Come on out and I'll give
you lunch."
"Look," I said severely, "this isn't any joke. There is nothing to laugh a
t. You are witnessing the birth of a new and powerful organization...
"Come on," he said and he began to laugh again. "Come on and have lunc
h."
"When can you get those cards printed?" I said. My voice was stern and b
usinesslike. He paused and stared at us. "You mean... you really mean... you
're serious about this thing?"
"Absolutely. You are witnessing the birth...
"All right," he said, "all right," he stood up. "I think you're crazy and
you'll get in trouble. Those boys like messing other people about, but they
don't much fancy being messed about themselves."
"When can you get them printed, and without any of your workers readin
g them?"
"For this," he answered gravely, "I will give up my lunch. I will set the
type myself. It is the least I can do." He laughed again and the rims of his
huge nostrils twitched with pleasure. "How many do you want?"
"A thousand--to start with, and envelopes."
"Come back at two o'clock," he said and I thanked him very much and as
we went out we could hear his laughter rumbling down the passage into the
back of the shop.
At exactly two o'clock we were back. George Karnoffsky was in his office
and the first thing I saw as we went in was the high stack of printed cards
on his desk in front of him. They were large cards, about twice the size of
ordinary wedding or cocktail invitation-cards. "There you are," he said. "A
ll ready for you." The fool was still laughing.

He handed us each a card and I examined mine carefully. It was a beauti
ful thing. He had obviously taken much trouble over it. The card itself was
thick and stiff with narrow gold edging all the way around, and the letter
s of the heading were exceedingly elegant. I cannot reproduce it here in al
l its splendour, but I can at least show you how it read: VENGEANCE IS MINE
INC.
Dear.....................
You have probably seen columnist 's slanderous and unprovoked attack upon
your character in today's paper. It is an outrageous insinuation, a delibera
te distortion of the truth.
Are you yourself prepared to allow this miserable malice-monger to insul
t you in this manner?
The whole world knows that it is foreign to the nature of the American pe
ople to permit themselves to be insulted either in public or in private witho
ut rising up in righteous indignation and demanding--nay, exacting--a just me
asure of retribution.
On the other hand, it is only natural that a citizen of your standing and
reputation will not wish personally to become further involved in this sordid
petty affair, or indeed to have any direct contact whatsoever with this vile p
erson.
How then are you to obtain satisfaction?

The answer is simple, VENGEANCE IS MINE
INC. Will obtain it for you. We will undertake, on your behalf and in absol
ute confidence, to administer individual punishment to columnist, and in th
is regard we respectfully submit to you a choice of methods (together with
prices) for your consideration: 1. Punch him on the nose, once, hard $500 2
. Black his eye $600 3. Punch him on the nose and black his eye $1000 4. In
troduce a rattlesnake (with venom extracted) into his car, on the floor by
his pedals, when he parks it $1500 5. Kidnap him, take all his clothes away
except his underpants, his shoes and socks, then dump him out on Fifth Ave
. in the rush hour $2500 This work executed by a professional.
If you desire to avail yourself of any of these offers, kindly reply to
VENGEANCE IS MINE INC. at the address indicated upon the enclosed slip of pa
per. If it is practicable, you will be notified in advance of the place wher
e the action will occur and of the time, so that you may, if you wish, watch
the proceedings in person from a safe and anonymous distance.
No payment need be made until after your order has been satisfactorily
executed, when an account will be rendered in the usual manner.

George Karnoffsky had done a beautiful job of printing.
"Claude," he said, "you like?"
"It's marvellous."
"It's the best I could do for you. It's like in the war when I would see
soldiers going off perhaps to get killed and all the time I would want to be
giving them things and doing things for them." He was beginning to laugh agai
n, so I said, "We'd better be going now. Have you got large envelopes for the
se cards?"
"Everything is here. And you can pay me when the money starts coming in.
" That seemed to set him off worse than ever and he collapsed into his chair
, giggling like a fool. George and I hurried out of the shop into the street
, into the cold snow-falling afternoon.
We almost ran the distance back to our room and on the way up I borrow
ed a Manhattan telephone directory from the public telephone in the hall.
We found 'Womberg, William S,' without any trouble and while I read out th
e address--somewhere up in the East Nineties--George wrote it on one of th
e envelopes.
'Gimple, Mrs Ella H,' was also in the book and we addressed an envelope
to her as well. "We'll just send to Womberg and Gimple today," I said. "We
haven't really got started yet. Tomorrow we'll send a dozen."
"We'd better catch the next post," George said.
"We'll deliver them by hand," I said. "Now, at once. The sooner they ge
t them the better. Tomorrow might be too late. They won't be half so angry
tomorrow as they are today. People are apt to cool off through the night. S
ee here," I said, "you go ahead and deliver those two cards right away. Whi
le you're doing that I'm going to snoop around the town and try to find out
something about the habits of Lionel Pantaloon. See you back here later in
the evening... At about nine o'clock that evening I returned and found Geo
rge lying on his bed smoking cigarettes and drinking coffee.
"I delivered them both; he said. "Just slipped them through the letter-b
oxes and rang the bells and beat it up the street. Womberg had a huge house,
a huge white house. How did you get on?"
"I went to see a man I know who works in the sports section of the Daily
Mirror. He told me all."
"What did he tell you?"
"He said Pantaloon's movements are more or less routine. He operates at
night, but wherever he goes earlier in the evening, he always--and this is t
he important point--he always finishes up at the Penguin Club. He gets there
round about midnight and stays until two or twothirty. That's when his legm
en bring him all the dope."
"That's all we want to know," George said happily.
"It's too easy."

"Money for old rope."
There was a full bottle of blended whisky in the cupboard and George fe
tched it out. For the next two hours we sat upon our beds drinking the whis
ky and making wonderful and complicated plans for the development of our or
ganization. By eleven o'clock we were employing a staff of fifty, including
twelve famous pugilists, and our offices were in Rockefeller Center. Towar
ds midnight we had obtained control over all columnists and were dictating
their daily columns to them by telephone from our headquarters, taking care
to insult and infuriate at least twenty rich persons in one part of the co
untry or another every day. We were immensely wealthy and George had a Brit
ish Bentley, I had five Cadillacs. George kept practising telephone talks w
ith Lionel Pantaloon. "That you, Pantaloon?"
"Yes, sir."
"Well, listen here. I think your column stinks today. It's lousy."
"I'm very sorry, sir. I'll try to do better tomorrow."
"Damn right you'll do better, Pantaloon. Matter of fact we've been thinki
ng about getting someone else to take over."
"But please, please sir, just give me another chance."
"OK, Pantaloon, but this is the last. And by the way, the boys are puttin
g a rattlesnake in your car tonight, on behalf of Mr Hiram C. King, the soap
manufacturer. Mr King will be watching from across the street so don't forget
to act scared when you see it."
"Yes, sir, of course, sir. I won't forget, sir..
When we finally went to bed and the light was out, I could still hear Geo
rge giving hell to Pantaloon on the telephone.
The next morning we were both woken up by the church clock on the corn
er striking nine. George got up and went to the door to get the papers and
when he came back he was holding a letter in his hand.
"Open it!" I said.
He opened it and carefully unfolded a single sheet of thin notepaper.
"Read it!" I shouted.
He began to read it aloud, his voice low and serious at first but rising
gradually to a high, almost hysterical shout of triumph as the full meaning
of the letter was revealed to him. It said: 'Your methods appear curiously
unorthodox. At the same time anything you do to that scoundrel has my approv
al. So go ahead. Start with Item 1, and if you are successful IT be only too
glad to give you an order to work right on through the list. Send the bill
to me. William S. Womberg.'
I recollect that in the excitement of the moment we did a kind of dance
around the room in our pyjamas, praising Mr Womberg in loud voices and sho
uting that we were rich. George turned somersaults on his bed and it is pos
sible that I did the same.

"When shall we do it?" he said. "Tonight?"
I paused before replying. I refused to be rushed. The pages of history
are filled with the names of great men who have come to grief by permitting
themselves to make hasty decisions in the excitement of a moment. I put on
my dressing-gown, lit a cigarette and began to pace up and down the room.
"There is no hurry," I said. "Womberg's order can be dealt with in due cour
se. But first of all we must send out today's cards."
I dressed quickly, we went out to the newsstand across the street, boug
ht one copy of every daily paper there was and returned to our room. The ne
xt two hours was spent in reading the columnists' columns, and in the end w
e had a list of eleven people--eight men and three women--all of whom had b
een insulted in one way or another by one of the columnists that morning. T
hings were going well. We were working smoothly. It took us only another ha
lf hour to look up the addresses of the insulted ones--two we couldn't find
--and to address the envelopes.
In the afternoon we delivered them, and at about six in the evening we
got back to our room, tired but triumphant. We made coffee and we fried h
amburgers and we had supper in bed. Then we re-read Womberg's letter aloud
to each other many many times.
"What's he doing he's giving us an order for six thousand one hundred dol
lars," George said. "Items 1 to 5 inclusive."
"It's not a bad beginning. Not bad for the first day. Six thousand a day wo
rks out at... let me see... it's nearly two million dollars a year, not countin
g Sundays. A million each. It's more than Betty Grable."
"We are very wealthy people," George said. He smiled, a slow and wondr
ous smile of pure contentment.
"In a day or two we will move to a suite of rooms at the St Regis."
"I think the Waldorf," George said.
"All right, the Waldorf. And later on we might as well take a house."
"One like Womberg's?"
"All right. One like Womberg's. But first," I said, "we have work to do
. Tomorrow we shall deal with Pantaloon. We will catch him as he comes out
of the Penguin Club. At two-thirty a. m. we will be waiting for him, and wh
en he comes out into the street you will step forward and punch him once, h
ard, right upon the point of the nose as per contract."
"It will be a pleasure," George said. "It will be a real pleasure. But ho
w do we get away? Do we run?"
"We shall hire a car for an hour. We have just enough money left for tha
t, and I shall be sitting at the wheel with the engine running, not ten yard
s away, and the door will be open and when you've punched him you'll just ju
mp back into the car and we'll be gone."
"It is perfect. I shall punch him very hard." George paused. He clenched

his right fist and examined his knuckles. Then he smiled again and he said sl
owly, "This nose of his, is it not possible that it will afterwards be so muc
h blunted that it will no longer poke well into other people's business?"
"It is quite possible," I answered, and with that happy thought in our min
ds we switched out the lights and went early to sleep.
The next morning I was woken by a shout and I sat up and saw George sta
nding at the foot of my bed in his pyjamas, waving his arms. "Look!" he sho
uted, "there are four! There are four!" I looked, and indeed there were fou
r letters in his hand.
"Open them. Quickly, open them."
The first one he read aloud: "Dear Vengeance Is Mine Inc., That's the bes
t proposition I've had in years. Go right ahead and give Mr Jacob Swinski the
rattlesnake treatment (Item 4). But I'll be glad to pay double if you'll for
get to extract the poison from its fangs. Yours Gertrude Porter Van dervelt.
PS You'd better insure the snake. That guy's bite carries more poison than th
e rattler's."
George read the second one aloud: "My cheque for $500 is made out and l
ies before me on my desk. The moment I receive proof that you have punched
Lionel Pantaloon hard on the nose, it will be posted to you, I should prefe
r a fracture, if possible. Yours etc. Wilbur H. Gollogly."
George read the third one aloud: "In my present frame of mind and again
st my better judgement, I am tempted to reply to your card and to request t
hat you deposit that scoundrel Walter Kennedy upon Fifth Avenue dressed onl
y in his underwear. I make the proviso that there shall be snow on the grou
nd at the time and that the temperature shall be sub-zero. H. Gresham."
The fourth one he also read aloud: "A good hard sock on the nose for Pa
ntaloon is worth five hundred of mine or anybody else's money. I should lik
e to watch. Yours sincerely, Claudia Calthorpe Hines."
George laid the letters down gently, carefully upon the bed. For a while
there was silence. We stared at each other, too astonished, too happy to spea
k. I began to calculate the value of those four orders in terms of money.
"That's five thousand dollars worth," I said softly.
Upon George's face there was a huge bright grin. "Claude," he said, "s
hould we not move now to the Waldorf?"
"Soon," I answered, "but at the moment we have no time for moving. We
have not even time to send out fresh cards today. We must start to execu
te the orders we have in hand. We are overwhelmed with work."
"Should we not engage extra staff and enlarge our organization?"
"Later," I said. "Even for that there is no time today. Just think what w
e have to do. We have to put a rattlesnake in Jacob Swinski's car... we have
to dump Walter Kennedy on Fifth Avenue in his underpants... we have to punch
Pantaloon on the nose... let me see... yes, for three different people we hav

e to punch Pantaloon. ¥ I stopped. I closed my eyes. I sat still. Again I bec
ame conscious of a small clear stream of inspiration flowing into the tissues
of my brain. "I have it!" I shouted. "I have it! I have it! Three birds with
one stone! Three customers with one punch!"
"How?"
"Don't you see? We only need to punch Pantaloon once and each of the th
ree customers... Womberg, Gollogly and Claudia Hines... will think it's bei
ng done specially for him or her."
"Say it again." I said it again.
"It's brilliant."
"It's common-sense. And the same principle will apply to the others. The
rattlesnake treatment and the others can wait until we have more orders. Pe
rhaps in a few days we will have ten orders for rattlesnakes in Swinski's ca
r. Then we will do them all in one go."
"It's wonderful."
"This evening then," I said, "we will handle Pantaloon. But first we mu
st hire a car. Also we must send telegrams, one to Womberg, one to Gollogly
and one to Claudia Hines, telling them where and when the punching will ta
ke place."
We dressed rapidly and went out.
In a dirty silent little garage down on East 9th Street we managed to hi
re a car, a 1934 Chevrolet, eight dollars for the evening. We then sent thre
e telegrams, each one identical and cunningly worded to conceal its true mea
ning from inquisitive people: 'Hope to see you outside Penguin Club two-thir
ty a.m. Regards V. I. Mine."
"There is one thing more," I said. "It is essential that you should be d
isguised. Pantaloon, or the doorman, for example, must not be able to identi
fy you afterwards. You must wear a false moustache."
"What about you?"
"Not necessary. I'll be sitting in the car. They won't see me."
We went to a children's toy-shop and we bought for George a magnificen
t black moustache, a thing with long pointed ends, waxed and stiff and shi
ning, and when he held it up against his face he looked exactly like the K
aiser of Germany. The man in the shop also sold us a tube of glue and he s
howed us how the moustache should be attached to the upper lip. "Going to
have fun with the kids?" he asked, and George said, "Absolutely."
All was now ready, but there was a long time to wait. We had three dolla
rs left between us and with this we bought a sandwich each and went to a mov
ie. Then, at eleven o'clock that evening, we collected our car and in it we
began to cruise slowly through the streets of New York waiting for the time
to pass.
"You'd better put on your moustache so as you get used to it."

We pulled up under a street lamp and I squeezed some glue on to George's
upper lip and fixed on the huge black hairy thing with its pointed ends. Th
en we drove on. It was cold in the car and outside it was beginning to snow
again. I could see a few small snowflakes falling through the beams of the c
ar-lights. George kept saying, "How hard shall I hit him?" and I kept answer
ing, "Hit him as hard as you can, and on the nose. It must be on the nose be
cause that is a part of the contract. Everything must be done right. Our cli
ents may be watching."
At two in the morning we drove slowly past the entrance to the Penguin Clu
b in order to survey the situation. "I will park there," I said, "just past th
e entrance in that patch of dark. But I will leave the door open for you."
We drove on. Then George said, "What does he look like? How do I know
it's him?"
"Don't worry," I answered. "I've thought of that," and I took from my poc
ket a piece of paper and handed it to' him. "You take this and fold it up sma
ll and give it to the doorman and tell him to see it gets to Pantaloon quickl
y. Act as though you are scared to death and in an awful hurry. It's a hundre
d to one that Pantaloon will come out. No columnist could resist that message
."
On the paper I had written: 'I am a worker in Soviet Consulate. Come to
the door very quickly please I have something to tell but come quickly as I
am in danger, I cannot come in to you.'
"You see," I said, "your moustache will make you look like a Russian. A
ll Russians have big moustaches."
George took the paper and folded it up very small and held it in his fin
gers. It was nearly half past two in the morning now and we began to drive t
owards the Penguin Club.
"You all set?" I said.
"Yes."
"We're going in now. Here we come. I'll park just past the entrance... h
ere. Hit him hard," I said, and George opened the door and got out of the ca
r. I closed the door behind him but I leant over and kept my hand on the han
dle so I could open it again quick, and I let down the window so I could wat
ch. I kept the engine ticking over.
I saw George walk swiftly up to the doorman who stood under the red and
white canopy which stretched out over the sidewalk. I saw the doorman turn
and look down at George and I didn't like the way he did it. He was a tall
proud man dressed in a magenta-coloured uniform with gold buttons and gold
shoulders and a broad white stripe down each magenta trouser-leg. Also he
wore white gloves and he stood there looking proudly down at George, frowni
ng, pressing his lips together hard. He was looking at George's moustache a
nd I thought Oh my God we have overdone it. We have over-disguised him. He'

s going to know it's false and he's going to take one of the long pointed e
nds in his fingers and he'll give it a tweak and it'll come off. But he did
n't. He was distracted by George's acting, for George was acting well. I co
uld see him hopping about, clasping and unclasping his hands, swaying his b
ody and shaking his head, and I could hear him saying, "Plees plees plees y
ou must hurry. It is life and teth. Plees plees take it kvick to Mr Pantalo
on." His Russian accent was not like any accent I had heard before, but all
the same there was a quality of real despair in his voice.
Finally, gravely, proudly, the doorman said, "Give me the note." George
gave it to him and said, "Tank you, tank you, but say it is urgent," and t
he doorman disappeared inside. In a few moments he returned and said, "It's
being delivered now." George paced nervously up and down. I waited, watchi
ng the door. Three or four minutes elapsed. George wrung his hands and said
, "Vere is he? Vere is he? Plees to go and see if he is not coming!"
"What's the matter with you?" the doorman said. Now he was looking at
George's moustache again.
"It is life and teth! Mr Pantaloon can help! He must come!"
"Why don't you shut up," the doorman said, but he opened the door agai
n and he poked his head inside and I heard him saying something to someone
.
To George he said, "They say he's coming now.', A moment later the doo
r opened and Pantaloon himself, small and dapper, stepped out. He paused b
y the door, looking quickly from side to side like an inquisitive ferret.
The doorman touched his cap and pointed at George. I heard Pantaloon say,
"Yes, what did you want?"
George said, "plees, dis vay a leetle so as novone can hear," and he le
d Pantaloon along the pavement, away from the doorman and towards the car.
"Come on, now," Pantaloon said. "What is it you want?"
Suddenly George shouted "Look!" and he pointed up the street. Pantaloon
turned his head and as he did so George swung his right arm and he hit pan
taloon plumb on the point of the nose. I saw George leaning forward on the
punch, all his weight behind it, and the whole of Pantaloon appeared someho
w to lift slightly off the ground and to float backwards for two or three f
eet until the fa•ade of the Penguin Club stopped him. All this happened ver
y quickly, and then George was in the car beside me and we were off and I c
ould hear the doorman blowing a whistle behind us.
"We've done it!" George gasped. He was excited and out of breath. "I hi
t him good! Did you see how good I hit him!"
It was snowing hard now and I drove fast and made many sudden turning
s and I knew no one would catch us in this snowstorm.
"Son of a bitch almost went through the wall I hit him so hard."
"Well done, George," I said. "Nice work, George."

"And did you see him lift? Did you see him lift right up off the ground?"
"Womberg will be pleased," I said.
"And Gollogly, and the Hines woman."
"They'll all be pleased," I said. "Watch the money coming in."
"There's a car behind us!" George shouted. "It's following us! It's right on
our tail! Drive like mad!"
"Impossible," I said. "They couldn't have picked us up already. It's just
another car going somewhere." I turned sharply to the right.
"He's still with us," George said. "Keep turning. We'll lose him soon."
"How the hell can we lose a police-car in a nineteen thirty-four Chev," I s
aid. "I'm going to stop."
"Keep going!" George shouted. "You're doing fine."
"I'm going to stop," I said. "It'll only make them mad if we go on."
George protested fiercely but I knew it was no good and I pulled in to the
side of the road. The other car swerved out and went past us and skidded to a
standstill in front of us.
"Quick," George said. "Let's beat it." He had the door open and he was re
ady to run.
"Don't be a fool," I said. "Stay where you are. You can't get away now."
A voice from outside said, "All right boys, what's the hurry?"
"No hurry," I answered. "We're just going home."
"Yea?"
"Oh yes, we're just on our way home now."
The man poked his head in through the window on my side, and he looked
at me, then at George, then at me again.
"It's a nasty night," George said. "We're just trying to reach home before
the streets get all snowed up."
"Well," the man said, "you can take it easy. I just thought I'd like to
give you this right away." He dropped a wad of banknotes on to my lap. "I'
m Gollogly," he added, "Wilbur H. Gollogly," and he stood out there in the
snow grinning at us, stamping his feet and rubbing his hands to keep them w
arm. "I got your wire and I watched the whole thing from across the street.
You did a fine job. I'm paying you boys double. It was worth it. Funniest
thing I ever seen. Goodbye boys. Watch your steps. They'll be after you now
. Get out of town if I were you. Goodbye." And before we could say anything
, he was gone.
When finally we got back to our room I started packing at once.
"You crazy?" George said. "We've only got to wait a few hours and we
receive five hundred dollars each from Womberg and the Hines woman. The
n we'll have two thousand altogether and we can go anywhere we want."
So we spent the next day waiting in our room and reading the papers, on
e of which had a whole column on the front page headed, 'Brutal assault on

famous columnist'. But sure enough the late afternoon post brought us two l
etters and there was five hundred dollars in each.
And right now, at this moment, we are sitting in a Pullman car, drinki
ng Scotch whisky and heading south for a place where there is always sunsh
ine and where the horses are running every day. We are immensely wealthy a
nd George keeps saying that if we put the whole of our two thousand dollar
s on a horse at ten to one we shall make another twenty thousand and we wi
ll be able to retire. 'We will have a house at Palm Beach,' he says, 'and
we will entertain upon a lavish scale. Beautiful socialites will loll arou
nd the edge of our swimming pool sipping cool drinks, and after a while we
will perhaps put another large sum of money upon another horse and we sha
ll become wealthier still. Possibly we will become tired of Palm Beach and
then we will move around in a leisurely manner among the playgrounds of t
he rich. Monte Carlo and places like that. Like the Au Khan and the Duke o
f Windsor. We will become prominent members of the international set and f
ilm stars will smile at us and head-waiters will bow to us and perhaps, in
time to come, perhaps we might even get ourselves mentioned in Lionel Pan
taloon's column.'
"That would be something," I said.
"Wouldn't it just," he answered happily. "Wouldn't that just be something.
"

The Butler
As soon as George Cleaver had made his first million, he and Mrs Cleaver mo
ved out of their small suburban villa into an elegant London house. They ac
quired a French chef called Monsieur Estragon and an English butler called
Tibbs, both wildly expensive. With the help of these two experts, the Cleav
ers set out to climb the social ladder and began to give dinner parties sev
eral times a week on a lavish scale.
But these dinners never seemed quite to come off. There was no animation,
no spark to set the conversation alight, no style at all. Yet the food was s
uperb and the service faultless.
"What the heck's wrong with our parties, Tibbs?" Mr Cleaver said to the
butler. "Why don't nobody never loosen up and let themselves go?"
Tibbs inclined his head to one side and looked at the ceiling. "I hope, sir,
you will not be offended if I offer a small suggestion."
"What is it?"
"It's the wine, sir."
"What about the wine?"

"Well, sir, Monsieur Estragon serves superb food. Superb food should
be accompanied by superb wine. But you serve them a cheap and very odious
Spanish red."
"Then why in heaven's name didn't you say so before, you twit?" cried Mr
Cleaver. "I'm not short of money. I'll give them the best flipping wine in
the world if that's what they want! What is the best wine in the world?"
"Claret, sir," the butler replied, "from the greatest ch‰teaux in Bord
eaux--Lafite, Latour, Haut-Brion, Margaux, Mouton-Rothschild and Cheval Bl
anc. And from only the very greatest vintage years, which are, in my opini
on, 1906, 1914, 1929 and 1945. Cheval Blanc was also magnificent in 1895 a
nd 1921, and Haut-Brion in 1906."
"Buy them all!" said Mr Cleaver. "Fill the flipping cellar from top to bot
tom!"
"I can try, sir," the butler said. "But wines like these are extremely rare a
nd cost a fortune."
"I don't give a hoot what they cost!" said Mr Cleaver. "Just go out and ge
t them!"
That was easier said than done. Nowhere in England or in France could T
ibbs find any wine from 1895, 1906, 1914 or 1921. But he did manage to get
hold of some twenty-nines and forty-fives. The bills for these wines were a
stronomical. They were in fact so huge that even Mr Cleaver began to sit up
and take notice. And his interest quickly turned into outright enthusiasm
when the butler suggested to him that a knowledge of wine was a very consid
erable social asset. Mr Cleaver bought books on the subject and read them f
rom cover to cover. He also learned a great deal from Tibbs himself, who ta
ught him, among other things, just how wine should be properly tasted. "Fir
st, sir, you sniff it long and deep, with your nose right inside the top of
the glass, like this. Then you take a mouthful and you open your lips a ti
ny bit and suck in air, letting the air bubble through the wine. Watch me d
o it. Then you roll it vigorously around your mouth. And finally you swallow it."
In due course, Mr Cleaver came to regard himself as an expert on wine, an
d inevitably he turned into a colossal bore. 'Ladies and gentlemen,' he would
announce at dinner, holding up his glass, 'this is a Margaux '29! The greate
st year of the century! Fantastic bouquet! Smells of cowslips! And notice esp
ecially the after taste and how the tiny trace of tannin gives it that glorio
us astringent quality! Terrific, ain't it?'
The guests would nod and sip and mumble a few praises, but that was all.
"What's the matter with the silly twerps?" Mr Cleaver said to Tibbs afte
r this had gone on for some time. "Don't none of them appreciate a great win
e?"
The butler laid his head to one side and gazed upward. "I think they would a

ppreciate it, sir," he said, "if they were able to taste it. But they can't."
"What the heck d'you mean, they can't taste it?"
"I believe, sir, that you have instructed Monsieur Estragon to put liberal q
uantities of vinegar in the salad-dressing."
"What's wrong with that? I like vinegar."
"Vinegar," the butler said, "is the enemy of wine. It destroys the palate.
The dressing should be made of pure olive oil and a little lemon juice. Nothi
ng else."
"Hogwash!" said Mr Cleaver.
"As you wish, sir."
"I'll say it again, Tibbs. You're talking hogwash. The vinegar don't spoil
my palate one bit."
"You are very fortunate, sir," the butler murmured, backing out of the ro
om.
That night at dinner, the host began to mock his butler in front of the gue
sts. "Mister Tibbs," he said, "has been trying to tell me I can't taste my wine
if I put vinegar in the salad-dressing. Right, Tibbs?"
"Yes, sir," Tibbs replied gravely.
"And I told him hogwash. Didn't I, Tibbs?"
"Yes, sir."
"This wine," Mr Cleaver went on, raising his glass, "tastes to me exactly
like a Ch‰teau Lafite '45, and what's more it is a Ch‰teau Lafite '45."
Tibbs, the butler, stood very still and erect near the sideboard, his face pal
e. "If you'll forgive me, sir," he said, "that is not a Lafite '45."
Mr Cleaver swung round in his chair and stared at the butler. "What the h
eck d'you mean," he said. "There's the empty bottles beside you to prove it!"
These great clarets, being old and full of sediment, were always decante
d by Tibbs before dinner. They were served in cut-glass decanters, while the
empty bottles, as is the custom, were placed on the sideboard. Right now, t
wo empty bottles of Lafite '45 were standing on the sideboard for all to see.
"The wine you are drinking, sir," the butler said quietly, "happens to be
that cheap and rather odious Spanish red."
Mr Cleaver looked at the wine in his glass, then at the butler. The blood
was coming to his face now, his skin was turning scarlet. "You're lying, Tib
bs!" he said.
"No sir, I'm not lying," the butler said. "As a matter of fact, I have nev
er served you any other wine but Spanish red since I've been here. It seemed t
o suit you very well."
"I don't believe him!" Mr Cleaver cried out to his guests. "The man's gon
e mad."
"Great wines," the butler said, "should be treated with reverence. It is

bad enough to destroy the palate with three or four cocktails before dinner,
as you people do, but when you slosh vinegar over your food into the bargain,
then you might just as well be drinking dishwater."
Ten outraged faces around the table stared at the butler. He had caught
them off balance. They were speechless.
"This," the butler said, reaching out and touching one of the empty bott
les lovingly with his fingers, "this is the last of the forty-fives. The twe
nty-nines have already been finished. But they were glorious wines. Monsieur
Estragon and I enjoyed them immensely."
The butler bowed and walked quite slowly from the room. He crossed the
hail and went out of the front door of the house into the street where Mons
ieur Estragon was already loading their suitcases into the boot of the smal
l car which they owned together.

Ah, Sweet Mystery of Life
MY cow started bulling at dawn and the noise can drive you crazy if the cow
shed is right under your window. So I got dressed early and phoned Claud at
the filling-station to ask if he'd give me a hand to lead her down the ste
ep hill and across the road over to Rummins's farm to have her serviced by
Rummins's famous bull.
Claud arrived five minutes later and we tied a rope around the cow's nec
k and set off down the lane on this cool September morning. There were high
hedges on either side of the lane and the hazel bushes had clusters of big r
ipe nuts all over them.
"You ever seen Rummins do a mating?" Claud asked me.
I told him I had never seen anyone do an official mating between a bull a
nd a cow.
"Rummins does it special," Claud said. "There's nobody in the world do
es a mating the way Rummins does it."
"What's so special about it?"
"You got a treat coming to you," Claud said.
"So has the cow," I said.
"If the rest of the world knew about what Rummins does at a mating," Cl
aud said, "he'd be world famous. It would change the whole science of dairy
-farming all over the world."
"Why doesn't he tell them then?" I asked.
"I doubt he's ever even thought about it," Claud said. "Rummins isn't one
to bother his head about things like that. He's got the best dairy-herd for
miles around and that's all he cares about. He doesn't want the newspapers sw

arming all over his place asking questions, which is exactly what would happe
n if it ever got out."
"Why don't you tell me about it," I said.
We walked on in silence for a while, the cow pulling ahead.
"I'm surprised Rummins said yes to lending you his bull," Claud said. "I
've never known him do that before."
At the bottom of the lane we crossed the Aylesbury road and climbed up
the hill on the other side of the valley towards the farm. The cow knew the
re was a bull up there somewhere and she was pulling harder than ever on th
e rope. We had to trot to keep up with her.
There were no gates at the farm entrance, just a wide gap and a cobbled
yard beyond. Rummins, carrying a pail of milk across the yard, saw us comi
ng. He set the pail down slowly and came over to meet us. "She's ready then
, is she?" he said.
"Been yelling her head off," I said.
Rummins walked around my cow, examining her carefully. He was a short m
an, built squat and broad like a frog. He had a wide frog mouth and broken
teeth and shifty eyes, but over the years I had grown to respect him for hi
s wisdom and the sharpness of his mind. "All right then," he said. "What is
it you want, a heifer calf or a bull?"
"Can I choose?"
"Of course you can choose."
"Then I'll have a heifer," I said, keeping a straight face. "We want milk no
t beef."
"Hey, Bert!" Rummins called out. "Come and give us a hand!"
Bert emerged from the cowsheds. He was Rummins's youngest son, a tall
boneless boy with a runny nose and something wrong with one eye. The eye w
as pale and misty-grey all over, like a boiled fish eye, and it moved quit
e independently from the other eye. "Get another rope," Rummins said.
Bert fetched a rope and looped it around my cow's neck so that she now
had two ropes holding her, my own and Bert's. "He wants a heifer," Rummins
said. "Face her into the sun."
"Into the sun?" I said. "There isn't any sun."
"There's always sun," Rummins said. "Them bloody clouds don't make no
difference. Come on now. Get a jerk on, Bert. Bring her round. Sun's over
there."
With Bert holding one rope and Claud and me holding the other, we mano
euvred the cow round until her head was facing directly towards the place
in the sky where the sun was hidden behind the clouds.
"I told you it was different," Claud whispered. "You're going to see some
thing soon you've never seen in your life before."
"Hold her steady now!" Rummins ordered. "Don't let her jump round!" Then

he hurried over to a shed in the far corner of the yard and brought out the
bull. He was an enormous beast, a black-and-white Friesian, with short legs
and a body like a ten-ton truck. Rummins was leading it by a chain attached
to a steel ring through the bull's nose.
"Look at them bangers on him," Claud said. "I'll bet you've never seen a b
ull with bangers like that before."
"Tremendous," I said. They were like a couple of cantaloupe melons in a
carrier bag and they were almost dragging on the ground as the bull waddle
d forward.
"You better stand back and leave the rope to me," Claud said. "You get r
ight out of the way." I was happy to comply.
The bull approached my cow slowly, staring at her with dangerous white
eyes. Then he started snorting and pawing the ground with one foreleg.
"Hang on tight!" Rummins shouted to Bert and Claud. They were leaning b
ack against their respective ropes, holding them very taut and at right ang
les to the cow.
"Come on, boy," Rummins whispered softly to the bull. "Go to it, lad."
With surprising agility the bull heaved his front part up on to the cow's
back and I caught a glimpse of a long scarlet penis, as thin as a rapier and
just as stiff, and then it was inside the cow and the cow staggered and the
bull heaved and snorted and in thirty seconds it was all over. The bull climb
ed down again slowly and stood there looking somewhat pleased with himself.
"Some bulls don't know where to put it," Rummins said. "But mine does.
Mine could thread a needle with that dick of his."
"Wonderful," I said. "A bull's eye."
"That's exactly where the word come from," Rummins said. "A bull's eye.
Come on, lad," he said to the bull. "You've had your lot for today." He le
d the bull back to the shed and shut him in and when he returned I thanked
him, and then I asked him if he really believed that facing the cow into th
e sun during the mating would produce a female calf.
"Don't be so damn silly," he said. "Of course I believe it. Facts is facts."
"What do you mean facts is facts?"
"I mean what I say, mister. It's certainty. That's right, ain't it Bert?"
"And if you face her away from the sun does it get you a male?"
"Every single time," Rummins said. I smiled and he saw it. "You don't b
elieve me, do you?"
"Not really," I said.
"Come with me," he said. "And when you see what I'm going to show you,
you'll bloody well have to believe me. You two stay here and watch that c
ow; he said to Claud and Bert. Then he led me into the farmhouse. The room
we went into was dark and small and dirty. From a drawer in the sideboard
he produced a whole stack of thin exercise books. They were the kind chil

dren use at school. "These is calving books," he announced. "And in here i
s a record of every mating that's ever been done on this farm since I firs
t started thirty-two years ago."
He opened a book at random and allowed me to look. There were
four columns on each page: COW'S NAME, DATE OF MATING, DATE OF B
IRTH, SEX OF CALF.
I glanced down the sex column. Heifer, it said. Heifer, Heifer, Heifer, Hei
fer, Heifer.
"We don't want no bull calves here," Rummins said. "Bull calves is a dead
loss on a dairy farm."
I turned over a page. Heifer, it said. Heifer, Heifer, Heifer, Heifer, Heifer.
"Hey," I said, "here's a bull calf."
"That's quite right," Rummins said. "Now take a look at what I wrote opp
osite that one at the time of the mating." I glanced at column two. Cow jump
ed round, it said.
"Some of them gets fractious and you can't hold 'em steady," Rummins said
. "So they finish up facing the other way. That's the only time I ever get a
bull."
"This is fantastic," I said, leafing through the book.
"Of course it's fantastic," Rummins said. "It's one of the most fantastic
things in the whole world. Do you actually know what I average on this farm?
I average ninety-eight per cent heifers year in year out! Check it for yours
elf. Go on and check it. I'm not stopping you."
"I'd like very much to check it," I said. "May I sit down?"
"Help yourself," Rummins said. "I've got work to do." I found a pencil
and paper and I proceeded to go through each one of the thirty-two little b
ooks with great care. There was one book for each year, from 1915 to 1946.
There were approximately eighty calves a year born on the farm, and my fina
l results over the thirty-two-year period were as follows: Heifer calves 2,
516 Bull calves 56 Total calves born, including stillborn 2,572 I went outs
ide to look for Rummins. Claud had disappeared. He'd probably taken my cow
home. I found Rummins in the dairy pouring milk into the separator. "Haven'
t you ever told anyone about this?" I asked him.
"Never have," he said.
"Why not?"
"I reckon it ain't nobody else's business."
"But my dear man, this could transform the entire milk industry the world
over."
"It might," he said. "It might easily do that. It wouldn't do the beef busin
ess no harm either if they could get bulls every time."
"How did you hear about it in the first place?"

"My old dad told me," Rummins said. "When I were about eighteen, my old da
d said to me, 'I'll tell you a secret,' he said, 'that'll make you rich.' And
he told me this."
"Has it made you rich?"
"I ain't done too bad for myself, have I?" he said.
"But did your father offer any sort of explanation as to why it works?" I a
sked.
Rummins explored the inner rim of one nostril with the end of his thum
b, holding the noseflap between thumb and forefinger as he did so. "A very
clever man, my old dad was," he said. "Very clever indeed. Of course he t
old me how it works."
"How?"
"He explained to me that a cow don't have nothing to do with deciding the
sex of the calf," Rummins said. All a cow's got is an egg. It's the bull dec
ides what the sex is going to be. The sperm of the bull."
"Go on," I said.
"According to my old dad, a bull has two different kinds of sperm, fem
ale sperm and male sperm. You follow me so far?"
"Yes," I said. "Keep going."
"So when the old bull shoots off his sperm into the cow, a sort of swimm
ing race takes place between the male and the female sperm to see which one
can reach the egg first. If the female sperm wins, you get a heifer."
"But what's the sun got to do with it?" I asked.
"I'm coming to that," he said, "so listen carefully. When an animal is st
anding on all fours like a cow, and when you face her head into the sun, then
the sperm has also got to travel directly into the sun to reach the egg. Swi
tch the cow around and they'll be travelling away from the sun."
"So what you're saying," I said, "is that the sun exerts a pull of some
sort on the female sperm and makes them swim faster than the male sperm."
"Exactly!" cried Rummins. "That's exactly it! It exerts a pull! It drag
s them forward! That's why they always win! And if you turn the cow round t
he other way, it's pulling them backwards and the male sperm wins instead."
"It's an interesting theory," I said. "But it hardly seems likely that the
sun, which is millions of miles away, could exert a pull on a bunch of sperma
tozoa inside a cow."
"You're talking rubbish!" cried Rummins. "Absolute and utter rubbish! D
on't the moon exert a pull on the bloody tides of the ocean to make 'em hig
h and low? Of course it does! So why shouldn't the sun exert a pull on the
female sperm?"
"I see your point."
Suddenly Rummins seemed to have had enough. "You'll have a heifer calf
for sure," he said, turning away. "Don't you worry about that."

"Mr Rummins," I said.
"What?"
"Is there any reason why this shouldn't work with humans as well?"
"Of course it'll work with humans," he said. "Just so long as you remembe
r everything's got to be pointed in the right direction. A cow ain't lying do
wn you know. It's standing on all fours."
"I see what you mean."
"And it ain't no good doing it at night either," he said, "because the sun i
s shielded behind the earth and it can't influence anything."
"That's true," I said, "but have you any sort of proof it works with human
s?"
Rummins laid his head to one side and gave me another of his long sly bro
ken-toothed grins. "I've got four boys of my own, ain't I?" he said.
"So you have."
"Ruddy girls ain't no use to me around here," he said. "Boys is what you
want on a farm and I've got four of 'em, right?"
"Right," I said, "you're absolutely right."

The Bookseller
IF, in those days, you walked up from Trafalgar Square into Charing C
ross Road, you would come in a few minutes to a shop on the right-han
d side that had above the window the words WILLIAM BUGGAGE--RARE BOOK
S.
If you peered through the window itself you would see that the walls we
re lined with books from floor to ceiling, and if you then pushed open the
door and went in, you would immediately be assailed by that subtle odour of
old cardboard and tea leaves that pervades the interiors of every second-h
and bookshop in London. Nearly always, you would find two or three customer
s in there, silent shadowy figures in overcoats and trilby hats rummaging a
mong the sets of Jane Austen and Trollope and Dickens and George Eliot, hop
ing to find a first edition.
No shop-keeper ever seemed to be hovering around to keep an eye on the
customers, and if somebody actually wanted to pay for a book instead of p
inching it and walking out, then he or she would have to push through a do
or at the back of the shop on which it said OFFICE--PAY HERE. If you went
into the office you would find both Mr William Buggage and his assistant,
Miss Muriel Tottle, seated at their respective desks and very much preoccu
pied. Mr Buggage would be sitting behind a valuable eighteenth-century mah
ogany partners-desk, and Miss Tottle, a few feet away, would be using a so

mewhat smaller but no less elegant piece of furniture, a Regency writing-t
able with a top of faded green leather. On Mr Buggage's desk there would i
nvariably be one copy of the day's London Times, as well as The Daily Tele
graph, The Manchester Guardian, The Western Mail, and The Glasgow Herald.
There would also be a current edition of Who's Who close at hand, fat and
red and well thumbed. Miss Tottle's writing-table would have on it an elec
tric typewriter and a plain but very nice open box containing notepaper an
d envelopes, as well as a quantity of paper-clips and staplers and other s
ecretarial paraphernalia.
Now and again, but not very often, a customer would enter the office f
rom the shop and would hand his chosen volume to Miss Tottle, who checked
the price written in pencil on the fly-leaf and accepted the money, giving
change when necessary from somewhere in the left-hand drawer of her writi
ng-table. Mr Buggage never bothered even to glance up at those who came in
and went out, and if one of them asked a question, it would be Miss Tottl
e who answered it.
Neither Mr Buggage nor Miss Tottle appeared to be in the least concerne
d about what went on in the main shop. In point of fact, Mr Buggage took th
e view that if someone was going to steal a book, then good luck to him. He
knew very well that there was not a single valuable first edition out ther
e on the shelves. There might be a moderately rare volume of Galsworthy or
an early Waugh that had come in with a job lot bought at auction, and there
were certainly some good sets of Boswell and Walter Scott and Robert Louis
Stevenson and the rest, often very nicely bound in half or even whole calf
. But those were not really the sort of things you could slip into your ove
rcoat pocket. Even if a villain did walk out with half a dozen volumes, Mr
Buggage wasn't going to lose any sleep over it. Why should he when he knew
that the shop itself earned less money in a whole year than the backroom bu
siness grossed in a couple of days. It was what went on in the back room th
at counted.
One morning in February when the weather was foul and sleet was slant
ing white and wet on to the window-panes of the office, Mr Buggage and Mi
ss Tottle were in their respective places as usual and each was engrossed
, one might even say fascinated, by his and her own work. Mr Buggage, wit
h a gold Parker pen poised above a note-pad, was reading The Times and jo
tting things down as he went along. Every now and again, he would refer t
o Who's Who and make more jottings.
Miss Tottle, who had been opening the mail, was now examining some ch
eques and adding up totals.
"Three today," she said.
"What's it come to?" Mr Buggage asked, not looking up.
"One thousand six hundred," Miss Tottle said. Mr Buggage said, "I don't

suppose we've "eard anything yet from that bishop's 'ouse in Chester, 'ave w
e?"
"A bishop lives in a palace, Billy, not a house," Miss Tottle said.
"I don't give a sod where 'ee lives," Mr Buggage said. "But I get just a l
ittle bit uneasy when there's no quick answer from somebody like that."
"As a matter of fact, the reply came this morning," Miss Tottle said.
"Coughed up all right?"
"The full amount."
"That's a relief," Mr Buggage said. "We never done a bishop before and I'
m not sure it was any too clever."
"The cheque came from some solicitors."
Mr Buggage looked up sharply. "Was there a letter?" he asked.
"Yes."
"Read it."
Miss Tottle found the letter and began to read: 'Dear Sir, With reference
to your communication of the 4th Instant, we enclose herewith a cheque for £
537 in full settlement. Yours faithfully, Smithson, Briggs and Ellis.' Miss T
ottle paused. "That seems all right, doesn't it?"
"It's all right this time," Mr Buggage said. "But we don't want no more sol
icitors and let's not 'ave any more bishops either."
"I agree about bishops," Miss Tottle said. "But you're not suddenly ruling
out earls and lords and all that lot, I hope?"
"Lords is fine," Mr Buggage said. "We never 'ad no trouble with lords. N
or earls either. And didn't we do a duke once?"
"The Duke of Dorset," Miss Tottle said. "Did him last year. Over a thous
and quid."
"Very nice," Mr Buggage said. "I remember selectin'
'im myself straight off the front page." He stopped talking while he prised
a bit of food out from between two front teeth with the nail of his little finge
r. "What I says is this," he went on. "The bigger the title, the bigger the twit
. In fact, anyone's got a title on 'is name is almost certain to be a twit."
"Now that's not quite true, Billy," Miss Tottle said. "Some people are giv
en titles because they've done absolutely brilliant things, like inventing pen
icillin or climbing Mount Everest."
"I'm talking about in'erited titles," Mr Buggage said. "Anyone gets born with
a title, it's odds-on 'ee's a twit."
"You're right there," Miss Tottle said. "We've never had the slightest trou
ble with the aristocracy."
Mr Buggage leaned back in his chair and gazed solemnly at Miss Tottle.
"You know what?" he said. "One of these days we might even 'ave a crack a
t royalty."
"Ooh, I'd love it," Miss Tottle said. "Sock them for a fortune."

Mr Buggage continued to gaze at Miss Tottle's profile, and as he did so,
a slightly lascivious glint crept into his eye. One is forced to admit that
Miss Tottle's appearance, when judged by the highest standards, was disappo
inting. To tell the truth when judged by any standards, it was still disappo
inting. Her face was long and horsey and her teeth, which were also rather l
ong, had a sulphurous tinge about them. So did her skin. The best you could
say about her was that she had a generous bosom, but even that had its fault
s. It was the kind that makes a single long tightly bound bulge from one sid
e of the chest to the other, and at first glance one got the impression that
there were not two individual breasts growing out of her body but simply on
e big long loaf of bread.
Then again, Mr Buggage himself was in no position to be overly finicky.
When one saw him for the first time, the word that sprang instantly to mind
was 'grubby'. He was squat, paunchy, bald and flaccid, and so far as his fac
e was concerned, one could only make a guess at what it looked like because
not much of it was visible to the eye. The major part was covered over by an
immense thicket of black, bushy, slightly curly hair, a fashion, one fears,
that is all too common these days, a foolish practice and incidentally a ra
ther dirty habit. Why so many males wish to conceal their facial characteris
tics is beyond the comprehension of us ordinary mortals. One must presume th
at if it were possible for these people also to grow hair all over their nos
es and cheeks and eyes, then they would do so, ending up with no visible fac
e at all but only an obscene and rather gamey ball of hair. The only possibl
e conclusion one can arrive at when looking at one of these bearded males is
that the vegetation is a kind of smoke-screen and is cultivated in order to
conceal something unsightly or unsavoury.
This was almost certainly true in Mr Buggage's case, and it was therefore
fortunate for all of us, and especially for Miss Tottle, that the beard was
there. Mr Buggage continued to gaze wistfully at his assistant. Then he said,
"Now pet, why don't you 'urry up and get them cheques in the post because af
ter you've done that I've got a little proposal to put to you."
Miss Tottle looked back over her shoulder at the speaker and gave him a s
mirk that showed the cutting edges of her sulphur teeth. Whenever he called h
er 'pet', it was a sure sign that feelings of a carnal nature were beginning
to stir within Mr Buggage's breast, and in other parts as well.
"Tell it to me now, lover," she said.
"You get them cheques done first," he said. He could be very commanding
at times, and Miss Tottle thought it was wonderful.
Miss Tottle now began what she called her Daily Audit. This involved e
xamining all of Mr Buggage's bank accounts and all of her own and then dec
iding into which of them the latest cheques should be paid. Mr Buggage, yo
u see, at this particular moment, had exactly sixty-six different accounts

in his own name and Miss Tottle had twenty-two. These were scattered arou
nd among various branches of the big three banks, Barclays, Lloyds, and Na
tional Westminster, all over London and a few in the suburbs. There was no
thing wrong with that. And it had not been difficult, as the business beca
me more and more successful, for either of them to walk into any branch of
these banks and open a Current Account, with an initial deposit of a few
hundred pounds. They would then receive a cheque book, a paying-in book an
d the promise of a monthly statement.
Mr Buggage had discovered early on that if a person has an account with
several or even many different branches of a bank, this will cause no comm
ent by the staff. Each branch deals strictly with its own customers and the
ir names are not circulated to other branches or to Head Office, not even i
n these computerized times.
On the other hand, banks are required by law to notify the Inland Reven
ue of the names of all clients who have Deposit Accounts containing one tho
usand pounds or more. They must also report the amounts of interest earned.
But no such law applies to Current Accounts because they earn no interest.
Nobody takes any notice of a person's Current Account unless it is overdra
wn or unless, and this seldom happens, the balance becomes ridiculously lar
ge. A Current Account containing let us say £100,000 might easily raise an
eyebrow or two among the staff, and the client would almost certainly get a
nice letter from the manager suggesting that some of the money be placed o
n deposit to earn interest. But Mr Buggage didn't give a fig for interest a
nd he wanted no raised eyebrows either. That is why he and Miss Tottle had
eighty-eight different bank accounts between them. It was Miss Tottle's job
to see that the amounts in each of these accounts never exceeded £20,000.
Anything more than that might, in Mr Buggage's opinion, cause an eyebrow to
raise, especially if it were left lying untouched in a Current Account for
months or years. The agreement between the two partners was seventy-five p
er cent of the profits of the business to Mr Buggage and twenty-five per ce
nt to Miss Tottle.
Miss Tottle's Daily Audit involved examining a list she kept of all the
balances in all those eighty-eight separate accounts and then deciding int
o which of them the daily cheque or cheques should be deposited. She had in
her filingcabinet eighty-eight different files, one for each bank account,
and eighty-eight different cheque books and eighty-eight different payingin books. Miss Tottle's task was not a complicated one but she had to keep
her wits about her and not muddle things up. Only the previous week they ha
d to open four new accounts at four new branches, three for Mr Buggage and
one for Miss Tottle. "Soon we're goin' to 'ave over a 'undred accounts in o
ur names," Mr Buggage had said to Miss Tottle at the time.
"Why not two hundred?" Miss Tottle had said.

"A day will come," Mr Buggage said, "when we'll 'ave used up all the ban
ks in this part of the country and you and I is goin' to 'ave to travel all
the way up to Sunderland or Newcastle to open new ones."
But now Miss Tottle was busy with her Daily Audit. "That's done," she sai
d, putting the last cheque and the paying-in slip into its envelope.
"Ow much we got in our accounts all together at this very moment?" Mr
Buggage asked her.
Miss Tottle unlocked the middle drawer of her writing-table and took ou
t a plain school exercise book. On the cover she had written the words My o
ld arithmetic book from school. She considered this a rather ingenious ploy
designed to put people off the scent should the book ever fall into the wr
ong hands. "Just let me add on today's deposit," she said, finding the righ
t page and beginning to write down figures. "There we are. Counting today,
you have got in all the sixty-six branches, one million, three hundred and
twenty thousand, six hundred and forty-three pounds, unless you've been cas
hing any cheques in the last few days."
"I 'aven't," Mr Buggage said. "And what've you got?"
"I have got... four hundred and thirty thousand, seven hundred and twent
y-five pounds."
"Very nice," Mr Buggage said. "And 'ow long's it taken us to gather in tho
se tidy little sums?"
"Just eleven years," Miss Tottle said. "What was that teeny weeny propos
al you were going to put to me, lover?"
"Ah," Mr Buggage said, laying down his gold pencil and leaning back to gaz
e at her once again with that pale licentious eye. "I was just thinkin'.. 'ere
's exactly what I was thinkin' why on earth should a millionaire like me be si
ttin'
'ere in this filthy freezin' weather when I could be reclinin' in the la
p of luxury beside a swimmin' pool with a nice girl like you to keep me comp
any and flunkeys bringin' us goblets of iced champagne every few minutes?"
"Why indeed?" Miss Tottle cried, grinning widely.
"Then get out the book and let's see where we 'aven't been?"
Miss Tottle walked over to a bookshelf on the opposite wall and took do
wn a thickish paperback called The 300 Best Hotels in the World chosen by R
ene Lecler. She returned to her chair and said, "Where to this time, lover?
"
"Somewhere in North Africa," Mr Buggage said. "This is February and you'
ve got to go at least to North Africa to get it really warm. Italy's not 'ot
enough yet, nor is Spain. And I don't want the flippin' West Indies. I've '
ad enough of them. Where 'aven't we been in North Africa?"
Miss Tottle was turning the pages of the book. "That's not so easy," she
said. "We've done the Palais Jamai in Fez... and the Gazelle d'Or in Taroudan

t... and the Tunis Hilton in Tunis. We didn't like that one..
"Ow many we done so far altogether in that book?" Mr Buggage asked he
r.
"I think it was forty-eight the last time I counted."
"And I 'as every intention of doin' all three 'undred of 'em before I'm fi
nished," Mr Buggage said. "That's my big ambition and I'll bet nobody else 'as
ever done it."
"I think Mr Rene Lecler must have done it," Miss Tottle said. "'Oo's 'ee?"
"The man who wrote the book."
"Ee don't count," Mr Buggage said. He leaned sideways in his chair and b
egan to scratch the left cheek of his rump in a slow meditative manner. "And
I'll bet 'ee 'asn't anyway. These travel guides use any Tom, Dick and 'Arry
to go round for 'em."
"Here's one!" Miss Tottle cried. "Hotel La Mamounia in Marrakech."
"Where's that?"
"In Morocco. Just round the top corner of Africa on the left-hand side."
"Go on then. What does it say about it?"
"It says," Miss Tottle read, "This was Winston Churchill's favourite hau
nt and from his balcony he painted the Atlas sunset time and again."
"I don't paint," Mr Buggage said. "What else does it say?"
Miss Tottle read on: "As the livened Moorish servant shows you into the t
iled and latticed colonnaded court, you step decisively into an illustration
of the 1001 Arabian nights..
"That's more like it," Mr Buggage said. "Go on."
"Your next contact with reality will come when you pay your bill on leav
ing."
"That don't worry us millionaires," Mr Buggage said. "Let's go. We'll leav
e tomorrow. Call that travel agent right away. First class. We'll shut the sho
p for ten days."
"Don't you want to do today's letters?"
"Bugger today's letters," Mr Buggage said. "We're on 'oliday from now on
. Get on to that travel agent quick." He leaned the other way now and starte
d scratching his right buttock with the fingers of his right hand. Miss Tott
le watched him and Mr Buggage saw her watching him but he didn't care. "Call
that travel agent," he said.
"And I'd better get us some Travellers Cheques," Miss Tottle said.
"Get five thousand quids' worth. I'll write the cheque. This one's on me
. Give me a cheque book. Choose the nearest bank. And call that 'otel in whe
rever it was and ask for the biggest suite they're got. They're never booked
up when you want the biggest suite."
Twenty-four hours later, Mr Buggage and Miss Tottle were sunbathing

beside the pool at La Mamounia in Marrakech and they were drinking champ
agne.
"This is the life," Miss Tottle said. "Why don't we retire altogether and b
uy a grand house in a climate like this?"
"What do we want to retire for?" Mr Buggage said. "We got the best busin
ess in London goin' for us and personally I find that very enjoyable."
On the other side of the pool a dozen Moroccan servants were laying ou
t a splendid buffet lunch for the guests. There were enormous cold lobster
s and large pink hams and very small roast chickens and several kinds of r
ice and about ten different salads. A chef was grilling steaks over a char
coal fire. Guests were beginning to get up from deck-chairs and mattresses
to mill around the buffet with plates in their hands. Some were in swimsu
its, some in light summer clothes, and most had straw hats on their heads.
Mr Buggage was watching them. Almost without exception, they were English
. They were the very rich English, smooth, well mannered, overweight, loud
-voiced and infinitely dull. He had seen them before all around Jamaica an
d Barbados and places like that. It was evident that quite a few of them k
new one another because at home, of course, they moved in the same circles
. But whether they knew each other or not, they certainly accepted each ot
her because all of them belonged to the same nameless and exclusive club.
Any member of this club could always, by some subtle social alchemy, recog
nize a fellow member at a glance. Yes, they say to themselves, he's one of
us. She's one of us. Mr Buggage was not one of them. He was not in the cl
ub and he never would be. He was a nouveau and that, regardless of how man
y millions he had, was unacceptable. He was also overtly vulgar and that w
as unacceptable, too. The very rich could be just as vulgar as Mr Buggage,
or even more so, but they did it in a different way.
"There they are," Mr Buggage said, looking across the pool at the guests.
"Them's our bread and butter. Every one of 'em's likely to be a future custo
mer."
"How right you are," Miss Tottle said.
Mr Buggage, lying on a mattress that was striped in blue, red, and gree
n, was propped up on one elbow, staring at the guests. His stomach was bulg
ing out in folds over his swimming-trunks and droplets of sweat were runnin
g out of the fatty crevices. Now he shifted his gaze to the recumbent figur
e of Miss Tottle lying beside him on her own mattress. Miss Tottle's loaf-o
f-bread bosom was encased in a strip of scarlet bikini. The bottom half of
the bikini was daringly brief and possibly a shade too small and Mr Buggage
could see traces of black hair high up on the inside of her thighs.
"We'll lave our lunch, pet, then we'll go to our room and take a little nap,
right?"
Miss Tottle displayed her sulphurous teeth and nodded her head.

"And after that we'll do some letters."
"Letters?" she cried. "I don't want to do letters! I thought this was going
to be a holiday!"
"It is a 'oliday, pet, but I don't like lettin' good business go to waste.
The 'otel will lend you a typewriter. I already checked on that. And they're
lendin' me their 'Oo's 'Oo. Every good 'otel in the world keeps an English 'Oo
's 'Oo. The manager likes to know 'oo's important so lee can kiss their backsi
des."
"They won't find you in it," Miss Tottle said, a bit huffy now.
"No," Mr Buggage said. "I'll grant you that. But they won't find many in i
t that's got more money'n me neither. In this world, it's not 'oo you are, my
girl. It's not even "oo you know. It's what you got that counts."
"We've never done letters on holiday before," Miss Tottle said.
"There's a first time for everything, pet."
"How can we do letters without newspapers?"
"You know very well English papers always go airmail to places like this
. I bought a Times in the foyer when we arrived. It's actually the same as I
was workin' on in the office yesterday so I done most of my 'omework alread
y. I'm beginning to fancy a piece of that lobster over there. You ever seen
bigger lobsters than that?"
"But you're surely not going to post the letters from here, are you?" Miss
Tottle said.
"Certainly not. We'll leave 'em undated and date 'em and post 'em as soon
as we return. That way we'll 'ave a nice backlog up our sleeves."
Miss Tottle stared at the lobsters on the table across the pool, then at
the people milling around, then she reached out and placed a hand on Mr Bug
gage's thigh, high up under the bathing-shorts. She began to stroke the hair
y thigh. "Come on, Billy," she said, "why don't we take a break from the let
ters same as we always do when we're on hols?"
"You surely don't want us throwing about a thousand quid away a day, do
you?" Mr Buggage said. "And quarter of it yours, don't forget that."
"We don't have the firm's notepaper and we can't use hotel paper, for God
's sake."
"I brought the notepaper," Mr Buggage said, triumphant. "I got a 'ole box
of it. And envelopes."
"Oh, all right," Miss Tottle said. "Are you going to fetch me some of that
lobster, lover?"
"We'll go together," Mr Buggage said, and he stood up and started wadd
ling round the pool in those almost knee-length bathing-trunks he had boug
ht a couple of years back in Honolulu. They had a pattern of green and yel
low and white flowers on them. Miss Tottle got to her feet and followed him.
Mr Buggage was busy helping himself at the buffet when he heard a man'

s voice behind him saying, "Fiona, I don't think you've met Mrs Smith-Swit
hin... and this is Lady Hedgecock,"
"How d'you do"... "How d'you do," the voices said.
Mr Buggage glanced round at the speakers. There was a man and a woman
in swimmingclothes and two elderly ladies wearing cotton dresses. Those
names, he thought. I've heard those names before, I know I have... SmithS
within... Lady Hedgecock. He shrugged and continued to load food on to hi
s plate.
A few minutes later, he was sitting with Miss Tottle at a small table
under a sun-umbrella and each of them was tucking into an immense half lob
ster. "Tell me, does the name Lady 'Edgecock mean anything to you?" Mr Bug
gage asked, talking with his mouth full.
"Lady Hedgecock? She's one of our clients. Or she was. I never forget n
ames like that. Why?"
"And what about a Mrs Smith-Swithin? Does that also ring a bell?"
"It does, actually," Miss Tottle said. "Both of them do. Why do you ask t
hat suddenly?"
"Because both of 'em's 'ere."
"Good God! How d'you know?"
"And what's more, my girl, they're together! They're chums!"
"They're not!"
"Oh, yes they are!"
Mr Buggage told her how he knew. "There they are," he said, pointing w
ith a fork whose prongs were yellow with mayonnaise. "Those two fat old br
oads talkin' to the tall man and the woman."
Miss Tottle stared, fascinated. "You know," she said, "I've never actually
seen a client of ours in the flesh before, not in all the years we've been in b
usiness."
"Nor me," Mr Buggage said. "One thing's for sure. I picked 'em right, didn
't I? They're rolling in it. That's obvious. And they're stupid. That's even m
ore obvious."
"Do you think it could be dangerous, Billy, the two of them knowing each
other?"
"It's a bloody queer coincidence," Mr Buggage said, "but I don't think it's
dangerous. Neither of 'em's ever goin' to say a word. That's the beauty of it.
"
"I guess you're right."
"The only possible danger," Mr Buggage said, "would be if they saw my na
me on the register. I got a very unusual name just like theirs. It would rin
g bells at once."
"Guests don't see the register," Miss Tottle said.
"No, they don't," Mr Buggage said. "No one's ever goin' to bother us. The

y never 'as and they never will."
"Amazing lobster," Miss Tottle said. "Lobster is sex food," Mr Buggage
announced, eating more of it.
"You're thinking of oysters, lover."
"I am not thinking of oysters. Oysters is sex food, too, but lobsters is st
ronger. A dish of lobsters can drive some people crazy."
"Like you, perhaps?" she said, wriggling her rump in the chair.
"Maybe," Mr Buggage said. "We shall just 'ave to wait and see about that
, won't we, pet?"
"Yes," she said.
"It's a good thing they're so expensive," Mr Buggage said. "If every To
m, Dick and 'Arry could afford to buy 'em, the We world would be full of se
x maniacs."
"Keep eating it," she said.
After lunch, the two of them went upstairs to their suite, where they cav
orted clumsily on the huge bed for a brief period. Then they took a nap.
And now they were in their private sittingroom and were wearing only d
ressing-gowns over their nakedness, Mr Buggage in a plum-coloured silk one
, Miss Tottle in pastel pink and pale green. Mr Buggage was reclining on t
he sofa with a copy of yesterday's Times on his lap and a Who's Who on the
coffee table.
Miss Tottle was at the writing-desk with a hotel typewriter before her
and a notebook in her hand. Both were again drinking champagne.
"This is a prime one," Mr Buggage was saying. "Sir Edward Leishman. Go
t the lead obit. Chairman of Aerodynamics Engineering. One of our major in
dustrialists, it says."
"Nice," Miss Tottle said. "Make sure the wife's alive."
"Leaves a widow and three children," Mr Buggage read out. "And... wait a
minute... in '00's 'Oo it says, Recreations, walkin' and fishin'. Clubs, Whit
e's and the Reform."
"Address?" Miss Tottle asked.
"The Red House, Andover, Wilts."
"How d'you spell Leishman?" Miss Tottle asked. Mr Buggage spelled it.
"How much shall we go for?"
"A lot," Mr Buggage said. "He was loaded. Try around nine 'undred."
"You want to slip in The Compleat Angler?
It says he was a fisherman."
"Yes. First edition. Four 'undred and twenty quid. You know the rest of it
by 'eart. Bang it out quick. I got another good one to come."
Miss Tottle put a sheet of notepaper into the typewriter and very rapi
dly she began to type. She had done so many thousands of these letters ove
r the years that she never had to pause for one word. She even knew how to

compile the list of books so that it came out to around nine hundred poun
ds or three hundred and fifty pounds or five hundred and twenty or whateve
r. She could make it come out to any sum Mr Buggage thought the client wou
ld stand. One of the secrets of this particular trade, as Mr Buggage knew,
was never to be too greedy. Never go over a thousand quid with anyone, no
t even a famous millionaire.
The letter, as miss Tottle typed it, went like this: WILLIAM BUGG
AGE--RARE BOOKS 27a Charing Cross Road, London.

Dear Lady Leishman,

It is with very great regret that I trouble you at this tragic time of your ber
eavement, but regretfully I am left with no alternative in the circumstances.
I had the pleasure of serving your late husband over a number of years a
nd my invoices were always sent to him care of White's Club, as indeed were
many of the little parcels of books that he collected with such enthusiasm.
He was always a prompt settler and a very pleasant gentleman to deal wi
th. I am listing below his more recent purchases, those which, alas, he had
ordered in more recent times before he passed away and which were delivere
d to him in the usual manner.
Perhaps I should explain to you that publications of this nature are often
very rare and can therefore be rather costly. Some are privately printed, som
e are actually banned in this country and those are more costly still.
Rest assured, dear madam, that I always conduct business in the strictest
confidence. My own reputation over many years in the trade is the best guara
ntee of my discretion. When the bill is paid, that is the last you will hear
of the matter, unless of course you happen to be able to lay hands on your la
te husband's collection of erotica, in which case I should be happy to make y
ou an offer for it.
The Books: THE COMPLEAT ANGLER, Isaak Walton, First Edition. G
ood clean copy. Some rubbing of edges. Rare. £420 LOVE IN FURS, Le
opold von Sacher Masoch, 1920 edition. Slip cover. £75 SEXUAL SECR
ETS, Translation from Danish. £40 HOW TO PLEASURE YOUNG GIRLS WHEN
YOU ARE OVER SIXTY, llustrations. Private printing from Paris. £9
5 THE ART OF PUNISHMENT--THE CANE, THE WHIP AND THE LASH, Transl
ed from German. Banned in U.K. £115 THREE NAUGHTY NUNS, Good clean
edition. £60 RESTRAINT--SHACKLES AND SILKEN CORDS, Illustrations.
£80 WHY TEENAGERS PREFER OLD MEN, Illustrations. American.£90 THE
LONDON DIRECTORY OF ESCORTS AND HOSTESSES, Current edition. £20 To
tal now due: £995 Yours faithfully, William Buggage "Right," Miss

Tottle said, running the notepaper out of her typewriter. "Done th
at one. But you realize I don't have my 'Bible' here, so I'll have
to check the names when I get home before posting the letters."
"You do that," Mr Buggage said.
Miss Tottle's Bible was a massive index-card file in which were recorde
d the names and addresses of every client they had written to since the beg
inning of the business. The purpose of this was to try as nearly as possibl
e to ensure that no two members of the same family received a Buggage invoi
ce. If this were to happen, there would always be the danger that they migh
t compare notes. It also served to guard against a case where a widow who h
ad received one invoice upon the death of her first husband might be sent a
nother invoice on the death of the second husband. That, of course, would l
et the cat right out of the bag. There was no guaranteed way of avoiding th
is perilous mistake because the widow would have changed her name when she
remarried, but Miss Tottle had developed an instinct for sniffing out such
pitfalls, and the Bible helped her to do it.
"What's next?" Miss Tottle asked.
"The next is Major General Lionel Anstruther. Here 'ee is. Got about six
inches in 'Oo's 'Oo. Clubs, Army and Navy. Recreations, Ridin' to 'Ounds."
"I suppose he fell off a horse and broke his flipping neck," Miss Tottle sa
id. "I'll start with Memoirs of a Foxh un ting Man, first edition, right?"
"Right. Two 'undred and twenty quid," Mr Buggage said. "And make it be
tween five and six 'undred altogether."
"Okay."
"And put in The Sting of the Ridin' Crop.
Whips seem to come natural to these foxhuntin' folk."
And so it went on.
The holiday in Marrakech continued pleasantly enough and nine days late
r Mr Buggage and Miss Tottle were back in the office in Charing Cross Road,
both with sun-scorched skins as red as the shells of the many lobsters the
y had eaten. They quickly settled down again into their normal and stimulat
ing routine. Day after day the letters went out and the cheques came in. It
was remarkable how smoothly the business ran. The psychology behind it was
, of course, very sound. Strike a widow at the height of her grief, strike
her with something that is unbearably awful, something she wants to forget
about and put behind her, something she wants nobody else to discover. What
's more, the funeral is imminent. So she pays up fast to get the sordid lit
tle business out of the way. Mr Buggage knew his onions. In all the years h
e had been operating, he had never once had a protest or an angry reply. Ju
st a cheque in an envelope. Now and again, but not often, there was no repl
y at all. The disbelieving widow had been brave enough to sling his letter
into the waste-paper basket and that was the end of it. None of them quite

dared to challenge the invoice because they could never be absolutely posit
ive that the late husband had been as pure as the wife believed and hoped.
Men never are. In many cases, of course, the widow knew very well that her
beloved had been a lecherous old bird and Mr Buggage's invoice came as no s
urprise. So she paid up even faster.
About a month after their return from Marrakech, on a wet and rainy aft
ernoon in March, Mr Buggage was reclining comfortably in his office with hi
s feet up on the top of his fine partner's desk, dictating to Miss Tottle s
ome details about a deceased and distinguished admiral. "Recreations," he w
as saying, reading from Who's Who, "Gardening, sailing and stamp-collecting
... " At that point, the door from the main shop opened and a young man cam
e in with a book in his hand. "Mr Buggage?" he said.
Mr Buggage looked up. "Over there," he said, waving towards Miss Tottle
. "She'll deal with you."
The young man stood still. His navy-blue overcoat was wet from the wea
ther and droplets of water were dripping from his hair. He didn't look at
Miss Tottle. He kept his eyes on Mr Buggage. "Don't you want the money?" h
e said, pleasantly enough.
"She'll take it."
"Why won't you take it?"
"Because she's the cashier," Mr Buggage said. "You want to buy a book, g
o ahead. She'll deal with you."
"I'd rather deal with you," the young man said.
Mr Buggage looked up at him. "Go on," he said. "Just do as you're told, th
ere's a good lad."
"You are the proprietor?" the young man said. "You are Mr William Bug
gage?"
"What if I am," Mr Buggage said, his feet still up on the desk.
"Are you or aren't you?"
"What's it to you?" Mr Buggage said.
"So that's settled," the young man said. "How d'you do, Mr Buggage." T
here was a curious edge to his voice now, a mixture of scorn and mockery.
Mr Buggage took his feet down from the desk-top and sat up a trifle stra
ighter. "You're a bit of a cheeky young bugger, aren't you," he said. "If yo
u want that book, I suggest you just pay your money over there and then you
can 'op it. Right?"
The young man turned towards the still open door that led to the front of
the shop. Just the other side of the door there were a couple of the usual k
ind of customers, men in raincoats, pulling out books and examining them.
"Mother," the young man called softly. "You can come in, Mother. Mr Bu
ggage is here."
A small woman of about sixty came in and stood beside the young man. Sh

e had a trim figure for her age and a face that must once have been ravishi
ng, but now it showed traces of strain and exhaustion, and the pale blue ey
es were dulled with grief. She was wearing a black coat and a simple black
hat. She left the door open behind her.
"Mr Buggage," the young man said. "This is my mother, Mrs Northcote."
Miss Tottle, the rememberer of names, turned round quick and looked
at Mr Buggage and made little warning movements with her mouth. Mr Bugga
ge got the message and said as politely as he could, "And what can I do
for you, madam?"
The woman opened her black handbag and took out a letter. She unfolded
it carefully and held it out to Mr Buggage. "Then it will be you who sent m
e this?" she said.
Mr Buggage took the letter and examined it at some length. Miss Tottle
, who had turned right round in her chair now, was watching Mr Buggage.
"Yes," Mr Buggage said. "This is my letter and my invoice. All correct
and in order. What is your problem, madam?"
"What I came here to ask you," the woman said, "is, are you sure it's right
?"
"I'm afraid it is, madam."
"But it is so unbelievable... I find it impossible to believe that my husba
nd bought those books."
"Let's see now, your 'usband, Mr... Mr "Northcote," Miss Tottle said.
"Yes, Mr Northcote, yes, of course, Mr Northcote. 'Ee wasn't in 'ere of
ten, once or twice a year maybe, but a good customer and a very fine gentle
man. May I offer you, madam, my sincere condolences on your sad loss."
"Thank you, Mr Buggage. But are you really quite certain you haven't
been mixing him up with somebody else?"
"Not a chance, madam. Not the slightest chance. My good secretary over t
here will confirm that there is no mistake."
"May I see it?" Miss Tottle said, getting up and crossing to take the let
ter from Mr Buggage. "Yes," she said, examining it. "I typed this myself. The
re is no mistake."
"Miss Tottle's been with me a long time," Mr Buggage said. "She knows th
e business inside out. I can't remember 'er ever makin' a mistake."
"I should hope not," Miss Tottle said.
"So there you are, madam," Mr Buggage said.
"It simply isn't possible," the woman said.
"Ah, but men will be men," Mr Buggage said. "They all 'ave their little b
it of fun now and again and there's no 'arm in that, is there, madam?" He sat
confident and unmoved in his chair, waiting now to have done with it. He fel
t himself master of the situation.

The woman stood very straight and still, and she was looking Mr Buggage
directly in the eyes. "These curious books you list on your invoice," she sa
id, "do they print them in Braille?"
"In what?"
"In Braille."
"I don't know what you're talking about, madam."
"I thought you wouldn't," she said. "That's the only way my husband could
have read them. He lost his sight in the last war, in the Battle of Alamein
more than forty years ago, and he was blind for ever after."
The office became suddenly very quiet. The mother and her son stood mo
tionless, watching Mr Buggage. Miss Tottle turned away and looked out of t
he window. Mr Buggage cleared his throat as though to say something, but t
hought better of it. The two men in raincoats, who were close enough to ha
ve heard every word through the open door, came quietly into the office. O
ne of them held out a plastic card and said to Mr Buggage, "Inspector Rich
ards, Serious Crimes Division, Scotland Yard." And to Miss Tottle, who was
already moving back towards her desk, he said, "Don't touch any of those
papers, please miss. Leave everything just where it is. You're both coming
along with us."
The son took his mother gently by the arm and led her out of the office, t
hrough the shop and on to the street.

The Hitchhiker
I HAD a new car. It was an exciting toy, a big BMW 3.3 Li, which means 3.3
litre, long wheelbase, fuel injection. It had a top speed of 129 mph and te
rrific acceleration. The body was pale blue. The seats inside were darker b
lue and they were made of leather, genuine soft leather of the finest quali
ty. The windows were electrically operated and so was the sunroof. The radi
o aerial popped up when I switched on the radio, and disappeared when I swi
tched it off. The powerful engine growled and grunted impatiently at slow s
peeds, but at sixty miles an hour the growling stopped and the motor began
to purr with pleasure.
I was driving up to London by myself. It was a lovely June day. They wer
e haymaking in the fields and there were buttercups along both sides of the
road. I was whispering along at 70 mph, leaning back comfortably in my seat,
with no more than a couple of fingers resting lightly on the wheel to keep
her steady. Ahead of me I saw a man thumbing a lift. I touched the brake and
brought the car to a stop beside him. I always stopped for hitchhikers. I k
new just how it used to feel to be standing on the side of a country road wa

tching the cars go by. I hated the drivers for pretending they didn't see me
, especially the ones in big empty cars with three empty seats. The large ex
pensive cars seldom stopped. It was always the smaller ones that offered you
a lift, or the rusty ones or the ones that were already crammed full of chi
ldren and the driver would say, 'I think we can squeeze in one more.'
The hitchhiker poked his head through the open window and said, "Goin
g to London, guv'nor?"
"Yes," I said. "Jump in."
He got in and I drove on.
He was a small ratty-faced man with grey teeth. His eyes were dark and
quick and clever, like rat's eyes, and his ears were slightly pointed at th
e top. He had a cloth cap on his head and he was wearing a greyish-coloured
jacket with enormous pockets. The grey jacket, together with the quick eye
s and the pointed ears, made him look more than anything like some sort of
huge human rat.
"What part of London are you headed for?" I asked him.
"I'm going right through London and out the other side," he said. "I'm goi
n' to Epsom, for the races. It's Derby Day today."
"So it is," I said. "I wish I were going with you. I love betting on horses."
"I never bet on horses," he said. "I don't even watch 'em run. That's a stup
id silly business."
"Then why do you go?" I asked.
He didn't seem to like that question. His ratty little face went absolutely
blank and he sat there staring straight ahead at the road, saying nothing.
"I expect you help to work the betting machines or something like that,"
I said. "That's even sillier," he answered. "There's no fun working them lo
usy machines and selling tickets to mugs. Any fool could do that."
There was a long silence. I decided not to question him any more. I re
membered how irritated I used to get in my hitchhiking days when drivers k
ept asking me questions. Where are you going? Why are you going there? Wha
t's your job? Are you married? Do you have a girlfriend? What's her name?
How old are you? And so forth and so forth. I used to hate it.
"I'm sorry," I said. "It's none of my business what you do. The trouble is
I'm a writer, and most writers are terribly nosy."
"You write books?" he asked.
"Yes."
"Writin' books is okay," he said. "It's what I call a skilled trade. I'm in
a skilled trade too. The folks I despise is them that spend all their lives doin
' crummy old routine jobs with no skill in 'em at all. You see what I mean?"
"Yes."
"The secret of life," he said, "is to become very very good at somethin' tha
t's very very 'ard to do."

"Like you," I said.
"Exactly. You and me both."
"What makes you think that I'm any good at my job?" I asked. "There's an
awful lot of bad writers around."
"You wouldn't be drivin' about in a car like this if you weren't no good at i
t," he answered. "It must've cost a tidy packet, this little job."
"It wasn't cheap."
"What can she do flat out?" he asked.
"One hundred and twenty-nine miles an hour," I told him.
"I'll bet she won't do it."
"I'll bet she will."
"All car-makers is liars," he said. "You can buy any car you like and it'll
never do what the makers say it will in the ads."
"This one will."
"Open 'er up then and prove it," he said. "Go on guv'nor, open 'er up and le
t's see what she'll do."
There is a traffic circle at Chalfont St Peter and immediately beyond th
ere's a long straight section of divided highway. We came out of the circle
onto the highway and I pressed my foot hard down on the accelerator. The big
car leaped forward as though she'd been stung. In ten seconds or so, we wer
e doing ninety.
"Lovely!" he cried. "Beautiful! Keep goin'!"
I had the accelerator jammed down against the floor and I held it there.
"One hundred!" he shouted. "A hundred and five! A hundred and ten! A h
undred and fifteen! Go on! Don't slack off!"
I was in the outside lane and we flashed past several cars as though t
hey were standing still a green Mini, a big cream-coloured Citroen, a whit
e Land Rover, a huge truck with a container on the back, an orange coloure
d Volkswagen Minibus "A hundred and twenty!" my passenger shouted, jumping
up and down. "Go on! Go on! Get 'er up to one-two-nine!"
At that moment, I heard the scream of a police siren. It was so loud it s
eemed to be right inside the car, and then a cop on a motorcycle loomed up al
ongside us in the inside lane and went past us and raised a hand for us to st
op.
"Oh, my sainted aunt!" I said. "That's torn it!"
The cop must have been doing about a hundred and thirty when he passed u
s, and he took plenty of time slowing down. Finally, he pulled to the side o
f the road and I pulled in behind him. "I didn't know police motorcycles cou
ld go as fast as that," I said rather lamely.
"That one can," my passenger said. "It's the same make as yours. It's a
BMW R9OS. Fastest bike on the road. That's what they're usin' nowadays."
The cop got off his motorcycle and leaned the machine sideways onto its

prop stand. Then he took off his gloves and placed them carefully on the s
eat. He was in no hurry now. He had us where he wanted us and he knew it.
"This is real trouble," I said. "I don't like it one little bit."
"Don't talk to 'im more than necessary, you understand," my companion sa
id. "Just sit tight and keep mum."
Like an executioner approaching his victim, the cop came strolling slow
ly towards us. He was a big meaty man with a belly, and his blue breeches w
ere skin-tight around enormous thighs. His goggles were pulled up onto the
helmet, showing a smouldering red face with wide cheeks. We sat there like
guilty schoolboys, waiting for him to arrive.
"Watch out for this man," my passenger whispered, "e looks mean as the d
evil."
The cop came round to my open window and placed one meaty hand on the
sill. "What's the hurry?" he said.
"No hurry, officer," I answered.
"Perhaps there's a woman in the back having a baby and you're rushing her
to hospital? Is that it?"
"No, officer."
"Or perhaps your house is on fire and you're dashing home to rescue the
family from upstairs?" His voice was dangerously soft and mocking.
"My house isn't on fire, officer."
"In that case," he said, "you've got yourself into a nasty mess, haven't y
ou? Do you know what the speed limit is in this country?"
"Seventy," I said.
"And do you mind telling me exactly what speed you were doing just no
w?"
I shrugged and didn't say anything.
When he spoke next, he raised his voice so loud that I jumped. "One hund
red and twenty miles per hour!" he barked. "That's fifty miles an hour over
the limit!"
He turned his head and spat out a big gob of spit. It landed on the wing
of my car and started sliding down over my beautiful blue paint. Then he tu
rned back again and stared hard at my passenger. "And who are you?" he asked
sharply. "He's a hitchhiker," I said. "I'm giving him a lift."
"I didn't ask you," he said. "I asked him."
"Ave I done somethin' wrong?" my passenger asked. His voice was soft a
nd oily as haircream.
"That's more than likely," the cop answered. "Anyway, you're a witness. I
'll deal with you in a minute. Driver's licence," he snapped, holding out his
hand.
I gave him my driver's licence.
He unbuttoned the left-hand breast pocket of his tunic and brought out t

he dreaded book of tickets. Carefully he copied the name and address from my
licence. Then he gave it back to me. He strolled around to the front of the
car and read the number from the licence plate and wrote that down as well.
He filled in the date, the time and the details of my offence. Then he tore
out the top copy of the ticket. But before handing it to me, he checked tha
t all information had come through clearly on his own carbon copy. Finally,
he replaced the book in his breast pocket and fastened the button.
"Now you," he said to my passenger, and he walked around to the other
side of the car. From the other breast pocket he produced a small black no
tebook. "Name?" he snapped.
"Michael Fish," my passenger said.
"Address?"
"Fourteen, Windsor Lane, Luton."
"Show me something to prove this is your real name and address," the po
liceman said.
My passenger fished in his pockets and came out with a driver's licenc
e of his own. The policeman checked the name and address and handed it bac
k to him. "What's your job?" he asked sharply.
"I'm an 'od carrier."
"A what?
"An 'od carrier."
"Spell it."
"H-o-d c-a--Ó "That'll do. And what's a hod carrier, may I ask?"
"An 'od carrier, officer, is a person 'oo carries the cement up the ladder to
the bricklayer. And the 'od is what 'ee carries it in. It's got a long 'andle, a
nd on the top you've got bits of wood set at an angle..
"All right, all right. Who's your employer?"
"Don't 'ave one. I'm unemployed."
The cop wrote this down in the black notebook. Then he returned the book
to his pocket and did up the button.
"When I get back to the station I'm going to do a little checking up on yo
u," he said to my passenger.
"Me? What've I done wrong?" the rat-faced man asked.
"I don't like your face, that's all," the cop said. "And we just might hav
e a picture of it somewhere in our files." He strolled round the car and retur
ned to my window.
"I suppose you know you're in serious trouble," he said to me.
"Yes, officer."
"You won't be driving this fancy car of yours again for a very long time,
not after we've finished with you. You won't be driving any car again, come
to that, for several years. And a good thing, too. I hope they lock you up fo
r a spell into the bargain."

"You mean prison?" I asked, alarmed.
"Absolutely," he said, smacking his lips. "In the clink. Behind the bars.
Along with all the other criminals who break the law. And a hefty fine into
the bargain. Nobody will be more pleased about that than me. I'll see you in
court, both of you. You'll be getting a summons to appear."
He turned and walked over to his motorcycle. He flipped the prop stand ba
ck into position with his foot and swung his leg over the saddle. Then he kic
ked the starter and roared off up the road out of sight.
"Phew!" I gasped. "That's done it."
"We was caught," my passenger said. "We was caught good and proper."
"I was caught, you mean."
"That's right," he said. "What you goin' to do now, guv'nor?"
"I'm going straight up to London to talk to my solicitor," I said. I started
my car and drove on.
"You mustn't believe what 'ee said to you about goin' to prison," my pass
enger said. "They don't put somebody in the clink just for speedin'."
"Are you sure of that?" I asked.
"I'm positive," he answered. "They can take your licence away and they can
give you a whoppin' big fine, but that'll be the end of it." I felt tremendou
sly relieved.
"By the way," I said, "why did you lie to him?"
"Who, me?" he said. "What makes you think I lied?"
"You told him you were an unemployed hod carrier. But you told me you w
ere in a highly skilled trade."
"So I am," he said. "But it don't do to tell everythin' to a copper."
"So what do you do?" I asked him.
"Ah," he said slyly. "That'd be tellin', wouldn't it?"
"Is it something you're ashamed of?"
"Ashamed?" he cried. "Me, ashamed of my job? I'm about as proud of it a
s anybody could be in the entire world!"
"Then why won't you tell me?"
"You writers really is nosy parkers, aren't you?" he said. "And you ain't g
oin' to be 'appy, I don't think, until you've found out exactly what the answer
is?"
"I don't really care one way or the other," I told him, lying.
He gave me a crafty look out of the sides of his eyes. "I think you do care
," he said. "I can see it in your face that you think I'm in some kind of very
peculiar trade and you're just achin' to know what it is."
I didn't like the way he read my thoughts. I kept quiet and stared at the ro
ad ahead.
"You'd be right, too," he went on. "I am in a very peculiar trade. I'm in th
e queerest peculiar trade of 'em all." I waited for him to go on.

"That's why I 'as to be extra careful 'oo I'm talking to, you see. 'Ow am I
to know, for instance, you're not another copper in plain clothes?"
"Do I look like a copper?"
"No," he said. "You don't. And you ain't. Any fool could tell that."
He took from his pocket a tin of tobacco and a packet of cigarette paper
s and started to roll a cigarette. I was watching him out of the corner of m
y eye, and the speed with which he performed this rather difficult operation
was incredible. The cigarette was rolled and ready in about five seconds. H
e ran his tongue along the edge of the paper, stuck it down and popped the c
igarette between his lips. Then, as if from nowhere, a lighter appeared in h
is hand. The lighter flamed. The cigarette was lit. The lighter disappeared.
It was altogether a remarkable performance.
"I've never seen anyone roll a cigarette as fast as that," I said.
"Ah," he said, taking a deep suck of smoke. "So you noticed."
"Of course I noticed. It was quite fantastic."
He sat back and smiled. It pleased him very much that I had noticed how
quickly he could roll a cigarette. "You want to know what makes me able to
do it?" he asked.
"Go on then."
"It's because I've got fantastic fingers. These fingers of mine," he said,
holding up both hands high in front of him, "are quicker and cleverer than the
fingers of the best piano player in the world!"
"Are you a piano player?"
"Don't be daft," he said. "Do I look like a piano player?"
I glanced at his fingers. They were so beautifully shaped, so slim and lo
ng and elegant, they didn't seem to belong to the rest of him at all. They lo
oked like the fingers of a brain surgeon or a watchmaker.
"My job," he went on, "is a hundred times more difficult than playin' the p
iano. Any twerp can learn to do that. There's titchy little kids learnin' to pl
ay the piano at almost any 'ouse you go into these days. That's right, ain't it
?"
"More or less," I said.
"Of course it's right. But there's not one person in ten million can learn
to do what I do. Not one in ten million! 'Ow about that?"
"Amazing," I said.
"You're darn right it's amazin'," he said.
"I think I know what you do," I said. "You do conjuring tricks. You're a c
onjuror."
"Me?" he snorted. "A conjuror? Can you picture me goin' round crummy ki
ds' parties makin' rabbits come out of top 'ats?"
"Then you're a card player. You get people into card games and you deal
yourself out marvellous hands."

"Me! A rotten cardsharper!" he cried. "That's a miserable racket if ever t
here was one."
"All right. I give up."
I was taking the car along slowly now, at no more than forty miles an
hour, to make sure I wasn't stopped again. We had come onto the main Lon
don-Oxford road and were running down the hill toward Denham.
Suddenly, my passenger was holding up a black leather belt in his hand.
"Ever seen this before?" he asked. The belt had a brass buckle of unusual de
sign.
"Hey!" I said. "That's mine, isn't it? It is mine! Where did you get it?"
He grinned and waved the belt gently from side to side. "Where d'you think
I got it?" he said. "Off the top of your trousers, of course."
I reached down and felt for my belt. It was gone.
"You mean you took it off me while we've been driving along?" I asked f
labbergasted.
He nodded, watching me all the time with those little black ratty eyes.
"That's impossible." I said. "You'd have had to undo the buckle and slide
the whole thing out through the loops all the way round. I'd have seen you doi
ng it. And even if I hadn't seen you, I'd have felt it."
"Ah, but you didn't, did you?" he said, triumphant. He dropped the belt
on his lap, and now all at once there was a brown shoelace dangling from his
fingers. "And what about this, then?" he exclaimed, waving the shoelace.
"What about it?" I said.
"Anyone around 'ere missing a shoelace?" he asked, grinning.
I glanced down at my shoes. The lace of one of them was missing. "Good
grief!" I said. "How did you do that? I never saw you bending down."
"You never saw nothin'," he said proudly. "You never even saw me mo
ve an inch. And you know why?"
"Yes," I said. "Because you've got fantastic fingers."
"Exactly right!" he cried. "You catch on pretty quick, don't you?" He s
at back and sucked away at his homemade cigarette, blowing the smoke out in
a thin stream against the windshield. He knew he had impressed me greatly
with those two tricks, and this made him very happy. "I don't want to be la
te," he said. "What time is it?"
"There's a clock in front of you," I told him.
"I don't trust car clocks," he said. "What does your watch say?"
I hitched up my sleeve to look at the watch on my wrist. It wasn't there.
I looked at the man. He looked back at me, grinning.
"You've taken that, too," I said.
He held out his hand and there was my watch lying in his palm. "Nice bit of
stuff, this," he said. "Superior quality. Eighteen-carat gold. Easy to sell, t
oo. It's never any trouble gettin' rid of quality goods."

"I'd like it back, if you don't mind," I said rather huffily.
He placed the watch carefully on the leather tray in front of him. "I woul
dn't nick anything from you, guv'nor," he said. "You're my pal. You're givin'
me a lift."
"I'm glad to hear it," I said.
"All I'm doin' is answerin' your question," he went on. "You asked me wha
t I do for a livin' and I'm showin' you."
"What else have you got of mine?"
He smiled again, and now he started to take from the pocket of his jacket
one thing after another that belonged to me--my driver's licence, a key ring
with four keys on it, some pound notes, a few coins, a letter from my publis
hers, my diary, a stubby old pencil, a cigarette lighter, and last of all, a
beautiful old sapphire ring with pearls around it belonging to my wife. I was
taking the ring up to a jeweller in London because one of the pearls was mis
sing.
"Now there's another lovely piece of goods," he said, turning the ring ove
r in his fingers. "That's eighteenth century, if I'm not mistaken, from the re
ign of King George the Third."
"You're right," I said, impressed. "You're absolutely right."
He put the ring on the leather tray with the other items.
"So you're a pickpocket," I said.
"I don't like that word," he answered. "It's a coarse and vulgar word. Pi
ckpockets is coarse and vulgar people who only do easy little amateur jobs. T
hey lift money from blind old ladies."
"What do you call yourself, then?"
"Me? I'm a fingersmith. I'm a professional fingersmith." He spoke the
words solemnly and proudly, as though he were telling me he was President
of the Royal College of Surgeons or the Archbishop of Canterbury.
"I've never heard that word before," I said. "Did you invent it?"
"Of course I didn't invent it," he replied. "It's the name given to them w
ho's risen to the very top of the profession. You've heard of a goldsmith or a
silversmith, for instance. They're experts with gold and silver. I'm an exper
t with my fingers, so I'm a fingersmith."
"It must be an interesting job."
"It's a marvellous job," he answered. "It's lovely."
"And that's why you go to the races?"
"Race meetings is easy meat," he said. "You just stand around after the
race, watchin' for the lucky ones to queue up and draw their money. And when
you see someone collectin' a big bundle of notes, you simply follows after
'im and 'elps yourself. But don't get me wrong, guv'nor. I never takes nothi
n' from a loser. Nor from poor people neither. I only go after them as can a
fford it, the winners and the rich."

"That's very thoughtful of you," I said. "How often do you get caught?"
"Caught?" he cried, disgusted. "Me get caught! It's only pickpockets get
caught. Fingersmiths never. Listen, I could take the false teeth out of you
r mouth if I wanted to and you wouldn't even catch me!"
"I don't have false teeth," I said.
"I know you don't," he answered. "Otherwise I'd 'ave 'ad 'em out long ago
!"
I believed him. Those long slim fingers of his seemed able to do anythin
g. We drove on for a while without talking.
"That policeman's going to check up on you pretty thoroughly," I said. "D
oesn't that worry you a bit?"
"Nobody's checkin' up on me," he said.
"Of course they are. He's got your name and address written down most ca
refully in his black book."
The man gave me another of his sly ratty little smiles. "Ah" he said. "So
'ee 'as. But I'll bet 'ee ain't got it all written down in 'is memory as wel
l. I've never known a copper yet with a decent memory. Some of 'em can't even
remember their own names."
"What's memory got to do with it?" I asked. "It's written down in his book,
isn't it?"
"Yes, guv'nor, it is. But the trouble is, 'ee's lost the book. 'Ee's lost bo
th books, the one with my name on it and the one with yours."
In the long delicate fingers of his right hand, the man was holding up i
n triumph the two books he had taken from the policeman's pockets. "Easiest
job I ever done," he announced proudly.
I nearly swerved the car into a milk truck, I was so excited.
"That copper's got nothin' on either of us now," he said.
"You're a genius!" I cried.
"Ee's got no names, no addresses, no car number, no nothin'," he said.
"You're brilliant!"
"I think you'd better pull off this main road as soon as possible," he said
. "Then we'd better build a little bonfire and burn these books."
"You're a fantastic fellow!" I exclaimed.
"Thank you, guv'nor," he said. "It's always nice to be appreciated."

The Surgeon
"YOU have done extraordinarily well," Robert Sandy said, seating himself be
hind the desk. "It's altogether a splendid recovery. I don't think there's
any need for you to come and see me any more."

The patient finished putting on his clothes and said to the surgeon, "May
I speak to you, please, for another moment?"
"Of course you may," Robert Sandy said. "Take a seat."
The man sat down opposite the surgeon and leaned forward, placing his ha
nds, palms downward, on the top of the desk. "I suppose you still refuse to
take a fee?" he said.
"I've never taken one yet and I don't propose to change my ways at this t
ime of life," Robert Sandy told him pleasantly. "I work entirely for the Nati
onal Health Service and they pay me a very fair salary."
Robert Sandy MA, M. CHIR, FRCs, had been at The Radcliffe Infirmary in
Oxford for eighteen years and he was now fifty-two years old, with a wife
and three grown-up children. Unlike many of his colleagues, he did not ha
nker after fame and riches. He was basically a simple man utterly devoted
to his profession.
It was now seven weeks since his patient, a university undergraduate, h
ad been rushed into Casualty by ambulance after a nasty car accident in the
Banbury Road not far from the hospital. He was suffering from massive abdo
minal injuries and he had lost consciousness. When the call came through fr
om Casualty for an emergency surgeon, Robert Sandy was up in his office hav
ing a cup of tea after a fairly arduous morning's work which had included a
gall-bladder, a prostate and a total colostomy, but for some reason he hap
pened to be the only general surgeon available at that moment. He took one
more sip of his tea, then walked straight back into the operating theatre a
nd started scrubbing up all over again.
After three and a half hours on the operating table, the patient was st
ill alive and Robert Sandy had done everything he could to save his life. T
he next day, to the surgeon's considerable surprise, the man was showing si
gns that he was going to survive. In addition, his mind was lucid and he wa
s speaking coherently. It was only then, on the morning after the operation
, that Robert Sandy began to realize that he had an important person on his
hands. Three dignified gentlemen from the Saudi Arabian Embassy, including
the Ambassador himself, came into the hospital and the first thing they wa
nted was to call in all manner of celebrated surgeons from Harley Street to
advise on the case. The patient, with bottles suspended all round his bed
and tubes running into many parts of his body, shook his head and murmured
something in Arabic to the Ambassador.
"He says he wants only you to look after him," the Ambassador said to R
obert Sandy.
"You are very welcome to call in anyone else you choose for consultation
," Robert Sandy said.
"Not if he doesn't want us to," the Ambassador said. "He says you have s
aved his life and he has absolute faith in you. We must respect his wishes."

The Ambassador then told Robert Sandy that his patient was none other t
han a prince of royal blood. In other words, he was one of the many sons of
the present King of Saudi Arabia.
A few days later, when the Prince was off the danger list, the Embassy t
ried once again to persuade him to make a change. They wanted him to be move
d to a far more luxurious hospital that catered only for private patients, b
ut the Prince would have none of it. "I stay here," he said, "with the surge
on who saved my life."
Robert Sandy was touched by the confidence his patient was putting in h
im, and throughout the long weeks of recovery, he did his best to ensure th
at this confidence was not misplaced.
And now, in the consulting-room, the Prince was saying, "I do wish you
would allow me to pay you for all you have done, Mr Sandy." The young man
had spent three years at Oxford and he knew very well that in England a s
urgeon was always addressed as 'Mister' and not 'Doctor'. "Please let me p
ay you, Mr Sandy," he said.
Robert Sandy shook his head. "I'm sorry," he answered, "but I still have to
say no. It's just a personal rule of mine and I won't break it."
"But dash it all, you saved my life," the Prince said, tapping the palms of
his hands on the desk.
"I did no more than any other competent surgeon would have done," Robe
rt Sandy said.
The Prince took his hands off the desk and clasped them on his lap. "All
right, Mr Sandy, even though you refuse a fee, there is surely no reason wh
y my father should not give you a small present to show his gratitude."
Robert Sandy shrugged his shoulders. Grateful patients quite often gave
him a case of whisky or a dozen bottles of wine and he accepted these thin
gs gracefully. He never expected them, but he was awfully pleased when they
arrived. It was a nice way of saying thank you.
The Prince took from his jacket pocket a small pouch made of black velve
t and he pushed it across the desk. "My father," he said, "has asked me to t
ell you how enormously indebted he is to you for what you have done. He told
me that whether you took a fee or not, I was to make sure you accepted this
little gift."
Robert Sandy looked suspiciously at the black pouch, but he made no move
to take it.
"My father," the Prince went on, "said also to tell you that in his eyes m
y life is without price and that nothing on earth can repay you adequately for
having saved it. This is simply a what shall we call it... a present for your
next birthday. A small birthday present."
"He shouldn't give me anything," Robert Sandy said.
"Look at it, please," the Prince said.

Rather gingerly, the surgeon picked up the pouch and loosened the silk
thread at the opening. When he tipped it upside down, there was a flash of
brilliant light as something icewhite dropped on to the plain wooden desk-t
op. The stone was about the size of a cashew nut or a bit larger, perhaps t
hree-quarters of an inch long from end to end, and it was pear shaped, with
a very sharp point at the narrow end. Its many facets glimmered and sparkl
ed in the most wonderful way.
"Good gracious me," Robert Sandy said, looking at it but not yet touching
it. "What is it?"
"It's a diamond," the prince said. "Pure white. It's not especially large, bu
t the colour is good."
"I really can't accept a present like this," Robert Sandy said. "No, it woul
dn't be right. It must be quite valuable."
The Prince smiled at him. "I must tell you something, Mr Sandy," he said.
"Nobody refuses a gift from the King. It would be a terrible insult. It has
never been done."
Robert Sandy looked back at the Prince. "Oh dear," he said. "You are ma
king it awkward for me, aren't you?"
"It is not awkward at all," the Prince said. "Just take it."
"You could give it to the hospital."
"We have already made a donation to the hospital," the Prince said. "Please
take it, not just for my father, but for me as well."
"You are very kind," Robert Sandy said. "All right, then. But I feel qui
te embarrassed." He picked up the diamond and placed it in the palm of one h
and. "There's never been a diamond in our family before," he said. "Gosh, it
is beautiful, isn't it. You must please convey my thanks to His Majesty and
tell him I shall always treasure it."
"You don't actually have to hang on to it," the Prince said. "My father w
ould not be in the least offended if you were to sell it. Who knows, one day
you might need a little pocket-money."
"I don't think I shall sell it," Robert Sandy said. "It is too lovely. Perhap
s I shall have it made into a pendant for my wife."
"What a nice idea," the Prince said, getting up from his chair. "And p
lease remember what I told you before. You and your wife are invited to my
country at any time. My father would be happy to welcome you both."
"That's very good of him," Robert Sandy said. "I won't forget."
When the Prince had gone, Robert Sandy picked up the diamond again and e
xamined it with total fascination. It was dazzling in its beauty, and as he
moved it gently from side to side in his palm, one facet after the other cau
ght the light from the window and flashed brilliantly with blue and pink and
gold. He glanced at his watch. It was ten minutes past three. An idea had c
ome to him. He picked up the telephone and asked his secretary if there was

anything else urgent for him to do that afternoon. If there wasn't, he told
her, then he thought he might leave early.
"There's nothing that can't wait until Monday," the secretary said, sens
ing that for once this most hard-working of men had some special reason for
wanting to go.
"I've got a few things of my own I'd very much like to do."
"Off you go, Mr Sandy," she said. "Try to get some rest over the weekend
. I'll see you on Monday."
In the hospital car park, Robert Sandy unchained his bicycle, mounted
and rode out on to the Woodstock Road. He still bicycled to work every day
unless the weather was foul. It kept him in shape and it also meant his w
ife could have the car. There was nothing odd about that. Half the populat
ion of Oxford rode on bicycles. He turned into the Woodstock Road and head
ed for The High. The only good jeweller in town had his shop in The High,
halfway up on the right and he was called H. F. Gold. It said so above the
window, and most people knew that H stood for Harry. Harry Gold had been
there a long time, but Robert had only been inside once, years ago, to buy
a small bracelet for his daughter as a confirmation present.
He parked his bike against the curb outside the shop and went in. A wom
an behind the counter asked if she could help him.
"Is Mr Gold in?" Robert Sandy said.
"Yes, he is."
"I would like to see him privately for a few minutes, if I may. My name i
s Sandy."
"Just a minute, please." The woman disappeared through a door at the bac
k, but in thirty seconds she returned and said, "Will you come this way, ple
ase."
Robert Sandy walked into a large untidy office in which a small, oldish
man was seated behind a partner's desk. He wore a grey goatee beard and st
eel spectacles, and he stood up as Robert approached him.
"Mr Gold, my name is Robert Sandy. I am a surgeon at The Radcliffe. I
wonder if you can help me."
"I'll do my best, Mr Sandy. Please sit down."
"Well, it's an odd story," Robert Sandy said. "I recently operated on on
e of the Saudi princes. He's in his third year at Magdalen and he'd been inv
olved in a nasty car accident. And now he has given me, or rather his father
has given me, a fairly wonderful-looking diamond."
"Good gracious me," Mr Gold said. "How very exciting."
"I didn't want to accept it, but I'm afraid it was more or less forced on me.
"
"And you would like me to look at it?"
"Yes, I would. You see, I haven't the faintest idea whether it's worth fi

ve hundred pounds or five thousand, and it's only sensible that I should know
roughly what the value is."
"Of course you should," Harry Gold said. "I'll be glad to help you. Docto
rs at the Radcliffe have helped me a great deal over the years."
Robert Sandy took the black pouch out of his pocket and placed it on th
e desk. Harry Gold opened the pouch and tipped the diamond into his hand. A
s the stone fell into his palm, there was a moment when the old man appeare
d to freeze. His whole body became motionless as he sat there staring at th
e brilliant shining thing that lay before him. Slowly, he stood up. He walk
ed over to the window and held the stone so that daylight fell upon it. He
turned it over with one finger. He didn't say a word. His expression never
changed. Still holding the diamond, he returned to his desk and from a draw
er he took out a single sheet of clean white paper. He made a loose fold in
the paper and placed the diamond in the fold. Then he returned to the wind
ow and stood there for a full minute studying the diamond that lay in the f
old of paper.
"I am looking at the colour," he said at last. "That's the first thing to do
. One always does that against a fold of white paper and preferably in a north l
ight."
"Is that a north light?"
"Yes, it is. This stone is a wonderful colour, Mr Sandy. As fine a D colou
r as I've ever seen. In the trade, the very best quality white is called a D c
olour. In some places it's called a River. That's mostly in Scandinavia. A lay
man would call it a Blue White."
"It doesn't look very blue to me," Robert Sandy said.
"The purest whites always contain a trace of blue," Harry Gold said. "Th
at's why in the old days they always put a blue-bag into the washing water.
It made the clothes whiter."
"Ah yes, of course."
Harry Gold went back to his desk and took out from another drawer a sort
of hooded magnifying glass. "This is a ten-times loupe," he said, holding i
t up. "What did you call it?"
"A loupe. It is simply a jeweller's magnifier. With this, I can examine the
stone for imperfections."
Back once again at the window, Harry Gold began a minute examination o
f the diamond through the ten-times loupe, holding the paper with the ston
e on it in one hand and the loupe in the other. This process took maybe fo
ur minutes. Robert Sandy watched him and kept quiet.
"So far as I can see," Harry Gold said, "it is completely flawless. It real
ly is a most lovely stone. The quality is superb and the cutting is very fine,
though definitely not modern."
"Approximately how many facets would there be on a diamond like that?

" Robert Sandy asked.
"Fifty-eight."
"You mean you know exactly?"
"Yes, I know exactly."
"Good Lord. And what roughly would you say it is worth?"
"A diamond like this," Harry Gold said, taking it from the paper and plac
ing it in his palm, "a D colour stone of this size and clarity would command
on enquiry a trade price of between twenty-five and thirty thousand dollars a
carat. In the shops it would cost you double that. Up to sixty thousand doll
ars a carat in the retail market."
"Great Scott!" Robert Sandy cried, jumping up. The little jeweller's wor
ds seemed to have lifted him clean out of his seat. He stood there, stunned.
"And now," Harry Gold was saying, "we must find out precisely how many cara
ts it weighs." He crossed over to a shelf on which there stood a small metal
apparatus. "This is simply an electronic scale," he said. He slid back a gl
ass door and placed the diamond inside. He twiddled a couple of knobs, then
he read off the figures on a dial. "It weighs fifteen point two seven carats
," he said. "And that, in case it interests you, makes it worth about half a
million dollars in the trade and over one million dollars if you bought it
in a shop."
"You are making me nervous," Robert Sandy said, laughing nervously.
"If I owned it," Harry Gold said, "it would make me nervous. Sit down ag
ain, Mr Sandy, so you don't faint."
Robert Sandy sat down.
Harry Gold took his time settling himself into his chair behind the big p
artner's desk. "This is quite an occasion, Mr Sandy," he said. "I don't often
have the pleasure of giving someone quite such a startlingly wonderful shock
as this. I think I'm enjoying it more than you are."
"I am too shocked to be really enjoying it yet," Robert Sandy said. "Giv
e me a moment or two to recover."
"Mind you," Harry Gold said, "one wouldn't expect much less from the Ki
ng of the Saudis. Did you save the young prince's life?"
"I suppose I did, yes."
"Then that explains it." Harry Gold had put the diamond back on to the f
old of white paper on his desk, and he sat there looking at it with the eyes
of a man who loved what he saw. "My guess is that this stone came from the
treasure-chest of old King Ibn Saud of Arabia. If that is the case, then it
will be totally unknown in the trade, which makes it even more desirable. Ar
e you going to sell it?"
"Oh gosh, I don't know what I am going to do with it," Robert Sandy said.
"It's all so sudden and confusing."
"May I give you some advice."

"Please do."
"If you are going to sell it, you should take it to auction. An unseen st
one like this would attract a lot of interest, and the wealthy private buyers
would be sure to come in and bid against the trade. And if you were able to
reveal its provenance as well, telling them that it came directly from the Sa
udi Royal Family, then the price would go through the roof."
"You have been more than kind to me," Robert Sandy said. "When I do decid
e to sell it, I shall come first of all to you for advice. But tell me, does
a diamond really cost twice as much in the shops as it does in the trade?"
"I shouldn't be telling you this," Harry Gold said, "but I'm afraid it does."
"So if you buy one in Bond Street or anywhere else like that, you are actu
ally paying twice its intrinsic worth?"
"That's more or less right. A lot of young ladies have received nasty sho
cks when they've tried to re-sell jewellery that has been given to them by ge
ntlemen."
"So diamonds are not a girl's best friend?"
"They are still very friendly things to have," Harry Gold said, "as you h
ave just found out. But they are not generally a good investment for the amat
eur."
Outside in The High, Robert Sandy mounted his bicycle and headed for hom
e. He was feeling totally light headed. It was as though he had just finishe
d a whole bottle of good wine all by himself. Here he was, solid old Robert
Sandy, sedate and sensible cycling through the streets of Oxford with more t
han half a million dollars in the pocket of his old tweed jacket! It was mad
ness. But it was true.
He arrived back at his house in Acacia Road at about half past four and
parked his bike in the garage alongside the car. Suddenly he found himself r
unning along the little concrete path that led to the front door. "Now stop
that!" he said aloud, pulling up short. "Calm down. You've got to make this
really good for Betty. Unfold it slowly." But oh, he simply could not wait t
o give the news to his lovely wife and watch her face as he told her the who
le story of his afternoon. He found her in the kitchen packing some jars of
home-made jam into a basket.
"Robert!" she cried, delighted as always to see him. "You're home early!
How nice!"
He kissed her and said, "I am a bit early, aren't I?"
"You haven't forgotten we're going to the Renshaws for the weekend? We
have to leave fairly soon."
"I had forgotten," he said. "Or maybe I hadn't. Perhaps that's why I'm hom
e early."
"I thought I'd take Margaret some jam."
"Good," he said. "Very good. You take her some jam. That's a very good

idea to take Margaret some jam."
There was something in the way he was acting that made her swing round
and stare at him. "Robert," she said, "what's happened? There's something t
he matter."
"Pour us each a drink," he said. "I've got a bit of news for you."
"Oh darling, it's not something awful, is it?"
"No," he said. "It's something funny. I think you'll like it."
"You've been made Head of Surgery!"
"It's funnier than that," he said. "Go on, make a good stiff drink for each o
f us and sit down and I'll tell you."
"It's a bit early for drinks," she said, but she got the ice-tray from th
e fridge and started making his whisky and soda. While she was doing this, sh
e kept glancing up at him nervously. She said, "I don't think I've ever seen
you quite like this before. You are wildly excited about something and you ar
e pretending to be very calm. You're all red in the face. Are you sure it's g
ood news?"
"I think it is," he said, "but I'll let you judge that for yourself." He sat
down at the kitchen table and watched her as she put the glass of whisky in fro
nt of him. "All right," she said. "Come on. Let's have it."
"Get a drink for yourself first," he said.
"My goodness, what is this?" she said, but she poured some gin into a gla
ss and was reaching for the ice-tray when he said, "More than that. Give your
self a good stiff one."
"Now I am worried," she said, but she did as she was told and then added i
ce and filled the glass up with tonic. "Now then," she said, sitting down besi
de him at the table, "get it off your chest."
Robert began telling his story. He started with the Prince in the consult
ing-room and he spun it out long and well so that it took a good ten minutes
before he came to the diamond.
"It must be quite a whopper," she said, "to make you go all red in the fa
ce and funny-looking."
He reached into his pocket and took out the little black pouch and put it o
n the table. "There it is," he said. "What do you think?"
She loosened the silk cord and tipped the stone into her hand. "Oh, my Go
d!" she cried. "It's absolutely stunning!"
"It is, isn't it."
"It's amazing."
"I haven't told you the whole story yet," he said, and while his wife ro
lled the diamond from the palm of one hand to the other, he went on to tell
her about his visit to Harry Gold in The High. When he came to the point whe
re the jeweller began to talk about value, he stopped and said, "So what do
you think he said it was worth?"

"Something pretty big," she said. "It's bound to be. I mean just look at it!"
"Go on then, make a guess. How much?"
"Ten thousand pounds," she said. "I really don't have any idea."
"Try again."
"You mean, it's more?"
"Yes, it's quite a lot more."
"Twenty thousand pounds!"
"Would you be thrilled if it was worth as much as that?"
"Of course, I would, darling. Is it really worth twenty thousand pounds?"
"Yes," he said. "And the rest."
"Now don't be a beast, Robert. Just tell me what Mr Gold said."
"Take another drink of gin."
She did so, then put down the glass, looking at him and waiting.
"It is worth at least half a million dollars and very probably over a million
."
"You're joking!" Her words came out in a kind of gasp.
"It's known as a pear-shape," he said. "And where it comes to a point at thi
s end, it's as sharp as a needle."
"I'm completely stunned," she said, still gasping.
"You wouldn't have thought half a million, would you?"
"I've never in my life had to think in those sort of figures," she said.
She stood up and went over to him and gave him a huge hug and a kiss. "You
really are the most wonderful and stupendous man in the world!" she cried.
"I was totally bowled over," he said. "I still am."
"Oh Robert!" she cried, gazing at him with eyes bright as two stars. "Do
you realize what this means? It means we can get Diana and her husband out
of that horrid little flat and buy them a small house!"
"By golly, you're right!"
"And we can buy a decent flat for John and give him a better allowance
all the way through his medical school! And Ben... Ben wouldn't have to go
on a motor-bike to work all through the freezing winters. We could get him
something better. And... and... and..
"And what?" he asked, smiling at her.
"And you and I can take a really good holiday for once and go wherever w
e please! We can go to Egypt and Turkey and you can visit Baalbek and all th
e other places you've been longing to go to for years and years!" She was qu
ite breathless with the vista of small pleasures that were unfolding in her
dreams. "And you can start collecting some really nice pieces for once in yo
ur life as well!"
Ever since he had been a student, Robert Sandy's passion had been the
history of the Mediterranean countries, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Syria and E

gypt, and he had made himself into something of an expert on the ancient w
orld of those various civilizations. He had done it by reading and studyin
g and by visiting, when he had the time, the British Museum and the Ashmol
ean. But with three children to educate and with a job that paid only a re
asonable salary, he had never been able to indulge this passion as he woul
d have liked. He wanted above all to visit some of the grand remote region
s of Asia Minor and also the now below-ground village of Babylon in Iraq a
nd he would love to see the Arch of Ctsephon and the Sphinx at Memphis and
a hundred other things and places, but neither the time nor the money had
ever been available. Even so, the long coffee-table in the living-room wa
s covered with small objects and fragments that he had managed to pick up
cheaply here and there through his life. There was a mysterious pale alaba
ster ushaptiu in the form of a mummy from Upper Egypt which he knew was Pr
e-Dynastic from about 7000 BC. There was a bronze bowl from Lydia with an
engraving on it of a horse, and an early Byzantine twisted silver necklace
, and a section of a wooden painted mask from an Egyptian sarcophagus, and
a Roman red-ware bowl, and a small black Etruscan dish, and perhaps fifty
other fragile and interesting little pieces. None was particularly valuab
le, but Robert Sandy loved them all.
"Wouldn't that be marvellous?" his wife was saying. "Where shall we go f
irst?"
"Turkey," he said.
"Listen," she said, pointing to the diamond that lay sparkling on the kit
chen table, "you'd better put your fortune away somewhere safe before you los
e it."
"Today is Friday," he said. "When do we get back from the Renshaws?"
"Sunday night."
"And what are we going to do with our million-pound rock in the meanwh
ile? Take it with us in my pocket?"
"No." she said, "that would be silly. You really cannot walk around with
a million pounds in your pocket for a whole weekend. It's got to go into a
safe-deposit box at the bank. We should do it now."
"It's Friday night, my darling. All the banks are closed till next Monday."
"So they are," she said. "Well then, we'd better hide it somewhere in the
house."
"The house will be empty till we come back," he said. "I don't think that'
s a very good idea."
"It's better than carrying it around in your pocket or in my handbag."
"I'm not leaving it in the house. An empty house is always liable to be bu
rgled."
"Come on, darling," she said, "surely we can think of a place where no one
could possibly find it."

"In the tea-pot," he said.
"Or bury it in the sugar-basin," she said.
"Or put it in the bowl of one of my pipes in the pipe-rack," he said. "Wit
h some tobacco over it."
"Or under the soil of the azalea plant," she said.
"Hey, that's not bad, Betty. That's the best so far." They sat at the kit
chen table with the shining stone lying there between them, wondering very se
riously what to do with it for the next two days while they were away.
"I still think it's best if I take it with me," he said.
"I don't, Robert. You'll be feeling in your pocket every five minutes to m
ake sure it's still there. You won't relax for one moment."
"I suppose you're right," he said. "Very well, then. Shall we bury it under
the soil of the azalea plant in the sitting-room? No one's going to look there
."
"It's not one hundred percent safe," she said. "Someone could knock the p
ot over and the soil would spill out on the floor and presto, there's a spark
ling diamond lying there."
"It's a thousand to one against that," he said. "It's a thousand to one aga
inst the house being broken into anyway."
"No, it's not," she said. "Houses are being burgled every day. It's not wo
rth chancing it. But look, darling, I'm not going to let this thing become a n
uisance to you, or a worry."
"I agree with that," he said.
They sipped their drinks for a while in silence.
"I've got it!" she cried, leaping up from her chair. "I've thought of a marv
ellous place!"
"Where?"
"In here," she cried, picking up the ice-tray and pointing to one of the em
pty compartments. "We'll just drop it in here and fill it with water and put it
back in the fridge. In an hour or two it'll be hidden inside a solid block of
ice and even if you looked, you wouldn't be able to see it."
Robert Sandy stared at the ice-tray. "It's fantastic!" he said. "You're a gen
ius! Let's do it right away!"
"Shall we really do it?"
"Of course. It's a terrific idea."
She picked up the diamond and placed it into one of the little empty compa
rtments. She went to the sink and carefully filled the whole tray with water.
She opened the door of the freezer section of the fridge and slid the tray in.
"It's the top tray on the left," she said. "We'd better remember that. And it
'll be in the block of ice furthest away on the right hand side of the tray."
"The top tray on the left," he said. "Got it. I feel better now that it's tuck
ed safely away."

"Finish your drink, darling," she said. "Then we must be off. I've packe
d your case for you. And we'll try not to think about our million pounds any
more until we come back."
"Do we talk about it to other people?" he asked her. "Like the Renshaws
or anyone else who might be there?"
"I wouldn't," she said. "It's such an incredible story that it would soon
spread around all over the place. Next thing you know, it would be in the pape
rs."
"I don't think the King of the Saudis would like that," he said.
"Nor do I. So let's say nothing at the moment."
"I agree," he said. "I would hate any kind of publicity."
"You'll be able to get yourself a new car," she said, laughing.
"So I will. I'll get one for you, too. What kind would you like, darling?"
"I'll think about it," she said.
***
Soon after that, the two of them drove off to the Renshaws for the week
end. It wasn't far, just beyond Whitney, some thirty minutes from their own
house. Charlie Renshaw was a consultant physician at the hospital and the
families had known each other for many years.
The weekend was pleasant and uneventful, and on Sunday evening Robert
and Betty Sandy drove home again, arriving at the, house in Acacia Road at
about seven pm. Robert took the two small suitcases from the car and they
walked up the path together. He unlocked the front door and held it open
for his wife.
"I'll make some scrambled eggs," she said, "and crispy bacon. Would you l
ike a drink first, darling?"
"Why not?" he said.
He closed the door and was about to carry the suitcases upstairs when h
e heard a piercing scream from the sitting-room "Oh no!,, she was crying. "
No! No! No!"
Robert dropped the suitcase and rushed in after her. She was standing th
ere pressing her hands to her cheeks and already tears were streaming down h
er face.
The scene in the sitting-room was one of utter desolation. The curtains
were drawn and they seemed to be the only things that remained intact in t
he room. Everything else had been smashed to smithereens. All Robert Sandy'
s precious little objects from the coffee-table had been picked up and flun
g against the walls and were lying in tiny pieces on the carpet. A glass ca
binet had been tipped over. A chest-of-drawers had had its four drawers pul
led out and the contents, photograph albums, games of Scrabble and Monopoly
and a chessboard and chessmen and many other family things had been flung
across the room. Every single book had been pulled out of the big floor-to-

ceiling bookshelves against the far wall and piles of them were now lying o
pen and mutilated all over the place. The glass on each of the four waterco
lours had been smashed and the oil painting of their three children painted
when they were young had had its canvas slashed many times with a knife. T
he armchairs and the sofa had also been slashed so that the stuffing was bu
lging out. Virtually everything in the room except the curtains and the car
pet had been destroyed.
"Oh, Robert," she said, collapsing into his arms, "I don't think I can stand
this."
He didn't say anything. He felt physically sick.
"Stay here," he said. "I'm going to look upstairs." He ran out and took
the stairs two at a time and went first to their bedroom. It was the same
in there. The drawers had been pulled out and the shirts and blouses and un
derclothes were now scattered everywhere. The bedclothes had been stripped
from the double-bed and even the mattress had been tipped off the bed and s
lashed many times with a knife. The cupboards were open and every dress and
suit and every pair of trousers and every jacket and every skirt had been
ripped from its hanger. He didn't look in the other bedrooms. He ran downst
airs and put an arm around his wife's shoulders and together they picked th
eir way through the debris of the sitting-room towards the kitchen. There t
hey stopped.
The mess in the kitchen was indescribable. Almost every single container
of any sort in the entire room had been emptied on to the floor and then sm
ashed to pieces. The place was a waste-land of broken jars and bottles and f
ood of every kind. All Betty's home-made jams and pickles and bottled fruits
had been swept from the long shelf and lay shattered on the ground. The sam
e had happened to the stuff in the store-cupboard, the mayonnaise, the ketch
up, the vinegar, the olive oil, the vegetable oil and all the rest. There we
re two other long shelves on the far wall and on these had stood about twent
y lovely large glass jars with big groundglass stoppers in which were kept r
ice and flour and brown sugar and bran and oatmeal and all sorts of other th
ings. Every jar now lay on the floor in many pieces, with the contents spewe
d around. The refrigerator door was open and the things that had been inside
, the leftover foods, the milk, the eggs, the butter, the yoghurt, the tomat
oes, the lettuce, all of them had been pulled out and splashed on to the pre
tty tiled kitchen floor. The inner drawers of the fridge had been thrown int
o the mass of slush and trampled on. The plastic ice-trays had been yanked o
ut and each had been literally broken in two and thrown aside. Even the plas
tic-coated shelves had been ripped out of the fridge and bent double and thr
own down with the rest. All the bottles of drink, the whisky, gin, vodka, sh
erry, vermouth, as well as half a dozen cans of beer, were standing on the t
able, empty. The bottles of drink and the beer cans seemed to be the only th

ings in the entire house that had not been smashed. Practically the whole fl
oor lay under a thick layer of mush and goo. It was as if a gang of mad chil
dren had been told to see how much mess they could make and had succeeded br
illiantly.
Robert and Betty Sandy stood on the edge of it all, speechless with horr
or. At last Robert said, "I imagine our lovely diamond is somewhere undernea
th all that."
"I don't give a damn about our diamond," Betty said. "I'd like to kill the
people who did this."
"So would I," Robert said. "I've got to call the police." He went back in
to the sitting-room and picked up the telephone. By some miracle it still wor
ked.
The first squad car arrived in a few minutes. It was followed over the
next half-hour by a Police Inspector, a couple of plain-clothes men, a fing
er-print expert and a photographer. The Inspector had a black moustache and
a short muscular body. "These are not professional thieves," he told Rober
t Sandy after he had taken a look round. "They weren't even amateur thieves
. They were simply hooligans off the street. Riff-raff. Yobbos. Probably th
ree of them. People like this scout around looking for an empty house and w
hen they find it they break in and the first thing they do is to hunt out t
he booze. Did you have much alcohol on the premises?"
"The usual stuff," Robert said. "Whisky, gin, vodka, sherry and a few cans
of beer."
"They'll have drunk the lot," the Inspector said. "Lads like these have
only two things in mind, drink and destruction. They collect all the booze o
n to a table and sit down and drink themselves raving mad. Then they go on t
he rampage."
"You mean they didn't come in here to steal?" Robert asked.
"I doubt they've stolen anything at all," the Inspector said. "If they'd be
en thieves they would at least have taken your TV set. Instead, they smashed it
up."
"But why do they do this?"
"You'd better ask their parents," the Inspector said. "They're rubbish, tha
t's all they are, just rubbish. People aren't brought up right any more these d
ays."
Then Robert told the Inspector about the diamond. He gave him all the de
tails from the beginning to end because he realized that from the police poi
nt of view it was likely to be the most important part of the whole business.
"Half a million quid!" cried the Inspector. "Jesus Christ!"
"Probably double that," Robert said.
"Then that's the first thing we look for," the Inspector said.
"I personally do not propose to go down on my hands and knees grubbing ar

ound in that pile of slush," Robert said. "I don't feel like it at this momen
t."
"Leave it to us," the Inspector said. "We'll find it. That was a clever place
to hide it."
"My wife thought of it. But tell me, Inspector, if by some remote chance t
hey had found it...
"Impossible," the Inspector said. "How could they?"
"They might have seen it lying on the floor after the ice had melted," Robe
rt said. "I agree it's unlikely. But if they had spotted it, would they have ta
ken it?"
"I think they would; the Inspector said." No one can resist a diamond. It h
as a sort of magnetism about it. Yes, if one of them had seen it on the floor,
I think he would have slipped it into his pocket. But don't worry about it, doc
tor. It'll turn up."
"I'm not worrying about it," Robert said. "Right now, I'm worrying abou
t my wife and about our house. My wife spent years trying to make this plac
e into a good home."
"Now look, sir," the Inspector said, "the thing for you to do tonight is t
o take your wife off to a hotel and get some rest. Come back tomorrow, both of
you, and we'll start sorting things out. There'll be someone here all the tim
e looking after the house."
"I have to operate at the hospital first thing in the morning," Robert said
. "But I expect my wife will try to come along."
"Good," the Inspector said. "It's a nasty upsetting business having your ho
use ripped apart like this. It's a big shock. I've seen it many times. It hits
you very hard."
Robert and Betty Sandy stayed the night at Oxford's Randolph Hotel, and
by eight o'clock the following morning Robert was in the Operating Theatre
at the hospital, beginning to work his way through his morning list.
Shortly after noon, Robert had finished his last operation, a straightfo
rward non-malignant prostate on an elderly male. He removed his rubber glove
s and mask and went next door to the surgeons' small rest-room for a cup of
coffee. But before he got his coffee, he picked up the telephone and called
his wife.
"How are you, darling?" he said.
"Oh Robert, it's so awful," she said. "I just don't know where to begin."
"Have you called the insurance company?"
"Yes, they're coming any moment to help me make a list."
"Good," he said. "And have the police found our diamond?"
"I'm afraid not," she said. "They've been through every bit of that slush in
the kitchen and they swear it's not there."
"Then where can it have gone? Do you think the vandals found it?"

"I suppose they must have," she said. "When they broke those ice-trays a
ll the ice-cubes would have fallen out. They fall out when you just bend the
tray. They're meant to."
"They still wouldn't have spotted it in the ice," Robert said.
"They would when the ice melted," she said. "Those men must have been in
the house for hours. Plenty of time for it to melt."
"I suppose you're right."
"It would stick out a mile lying there on the floor," she said, "the way it s
hines."
"Oh dear," Robert said.
"If we never get it back we won't miss it much anyway, darling," she said
. "We only had it a few hours."
"I agree," he said. "Do the police have any leads on who the vandals were
?"
"Not a clue," she said. "They found lots of finger-prints, but they don't
seem to belong to any known criminals."
"They wouldn't," he said, "not if they were hooligans off the street."
"That's what the Inspector said."
"Look, darling," he said, "I've just about finished here for the morning.
I'm going to grab some coffee, then I'll come home to give you a hand."
"Good," she said. "I need you, Robert. I need you badly."
"Just give me five minutes to rest my feet," he said, "I feel exhausted." **
*
In Number Two Operating Theatre not ten yards away, another senior surg
eon called Brian Goff was also nearly finished for the morning. He was on h
is last patient, a young man who had a piece of bone lodged somewhere in hi
s small intestine. Goff was being assisted by a rather jolly young Registra
r named William Haddock, and between them they had opened the patient's abd
omen and Goff was lifting out a section of the small intestine and feeling
along it with his fingers. It was routine stuff and there was a good deal o
f conversation going on in the room.
"Did I ever tell you about the man who had lots of little live fish in hi
s bladder?" William Haddock was saying.
"I don't think you did," Goff said.
"When we were students at Barts," William Haddock said, "we were being
taught by a particularly unpleasant Professor of Urology. One day, this twi
t was going to demonstrate how to examine the bladder using a cystoscope. T
he patient was an old man suspected of having stones. Well now, in one of t
he hospital waiting-rooms, there was an aquarium that was full of those tin
y little fish, neons they're called, brilliant colours, and one of the stud
ents sucked up about twenty of them into a syringe and managed to inject th
em into the patient's bladder when he was under his premed, before he was t

aken up to Theatre for his cystoscopy."
"That's disgusting!" the theatre sister cried. "You can stop right there,
Mr Haddock!" Brian Goff smiled behind his mask and said, "What happened next
?" As he spoke, he had about three feet of the patient's small intestine lyin
g on the green sterile sheet, and he was still feeling along it with his fing
ers.
"When the Professor got the cystoscope into the bladder and put his eye
to it," William Haddock said, "he started jumping up and down and shouting
with excitement.
"What is it, sir?' the guilty student asked him. "What do you see?"
"It's fish!' cried the Professor. 'There's hundreds of little fish! They're
swimming about!"
"You made it up," the theatre sister said. "It's not true."
"It most certainly is true," the Registrar said. "I looked down the cyst
oscope myself and saw the fish. And they were actually swimming about."
"We might have expected a fishy story from a man with a name like Haddo
ck," Goff said. "Here we are," he added. "Here's this poor chap's trouble.
You want to feel it?"
William Haddock took the pale grey piece of intestine between his fingers
and pressed. "Yes," he said. "Got it."
"And if you look just there," Goff said, instructing him, "you can see wh
ere the bit of bone has punctured the mucosa. It's already inflamed."
Brian Goff held the section of intestine in the palm of his left hand. Th
e sister handed him a scalpel and he made a small incision. The sister gave h
im a pair of forceps and Goff probed down amongst all the slushy matter of th
e intestine until he found the offending object. He brought it out, held firm
ly in the forceps, and dropped it into the small stainless-steel bowl the sis
ter was holding. The thing was covered in pale brown gunge.
"That's it," Goff said. "You can finish this one for me now, can't you, W
illiam. I was meant to be at a meeting downstairs fifteen minutes ago."
"You go ahead," William Haddock said. "I'll close him up."
The senior surgeon hurried out of the Theatre and the Registrar proceeded
to sew up, first the incision in the intestine, then the abdomen itself. The
whole thing took no more than a few minutes.
"I'm finished," he said to the anaesthetist.
The man nodded and removed the mask from the patient's face.
"Thank you, sister," William Haddock said. "See you tomorrow." As he mov
ed away, he picked up from the sister's tray the stainless-steel bowl that c
ontained the gunge-covered brown object. "Ten to one it's a chicken bone," h
e said and he carried it to the sink and began rinsing it under the tap.
"Good God, what's this?" he cried. "Come and look, sister!"
The sister came over to look. "It's a piece of costume jewellery," she s

aid. "Probably part of a necklace. Now how on earth did he come to swallow t
hat?"
"He'd have passed it if it hadn't had such a sharp point," William Haddock s
aid. "I think I'll give it to my girlfriend."
"You can't do that, Mr Haddock," the sister said. "It belongs to the pat
ient. Hang on a sec. Let me look at it again." She took the stone from Willi
am Haddock's gloved hand and carried it into the powerful light that hung ov
er the operating table. The patient had now been lifted off the table and wa
s being wheeled out into Recovery next door, accompanied by the anaesthetist.
"Come here, Mr Haddock," the sister said, and there was an edge of excit
ement in her voice. William Haddock joined her under the light. "This is ama
zing," she went on. "Just look at the way it sparkles and shines. A bit of g
lass wouldn't do that."
"Maybe it's rock-crystal," William Haddock said, "or topaz, one of those
semi-precious stones."
"You know what I think," the sister said. "I think it's a diamond."
"Don't be damn silly," William Haddock said.
A junior nurse was wheeling away the instrument trolley and a male thea
tre assistant was helping to clear up. Neither of them took any notice of t
he young surgeon and the sister. The sister was about twenty-eight years ol
d, and now that she had removed her mask she appeared as an extremely attra
ctive young lady.
"It's easy enough to test it," William Haddock said. "See if it cuts gla
ss." Together they crossed over to the frosted-glass window of the operating
-room. The sister held the stone between finger and thumb and pressed the sh
arp pointed end against the glass and drew it downward. There was a fierce s
craping crunch as the point bit into the glass and left a deep line two inch
es long.
"Jesus Christ!" William Haddock said. "It is a diamond!"
"If it is, it belongs to the patient," the sister said firmly.
"Maybe it does," William Haddock said, "but he was mighty glad to get ri
d of it. Hold on a moment. Where are his notes?" He hurried over to the side
table and picked up a folder which said on it JOHN DIGGS. He opened the fol
der. In it there was an Xray of the patient's intestine accompanied by the r
adiologist's report. John Diggs, the report said. Age 17. Address 123 Mayfie
ld Road, Oxford. There is clearly a large obstruction of some sort in the up
per small intestine. The patient has no recollection of swallowing anything
unusual, but says that he ate some fried chicken on Sunday evening. The obje
ct clearly has a sharp point that has pierced the mucosa of the intestine, a
nd it could be a piece of bone...
"How could he swallow a thing like that without knowing it?" William H
addock said.

"It doesn't make sense," the sister said.
"There's no question it's a diamond after the way it cut the glass," Will
iam Haddock said. "Do you agree?"
"Absolutely," the sister said.
"And a bloody big one at that," Haddock said. "The question is, how goo
d a diamond is it? How much is it worth?"
"We'd better send it to the lab right away," the sister said.
"To hell with the lab," Haddock said. "Let's have a bit of fun and do it our
selves."
"How?"
"We'll take it to Golds, the jewellers in The High. They'll know. The da
mn thing must be worth a fortune. We're not going to steal it, but we're dam
n well going to find out about it. Are you game?"
"Do you know anyone at Golds?" the sister said.
"No, but that doesn't matter. Do you have a car?"
"My Mini's in the car park."
"Right. Get changed. I'll meet you out there. It's about your lunch time an
yway. I'll take the stone."
Twenty minutes later, at a quarter to one, the little Mini pulled up out
side the jewellery shop of H. F. Gold and parked on the double-yellow lines.
"Who cares," William Haddock said. "We won't be long." He and the sister we
nt into the shop.
There were two customers inside, a young man and a girl. They were exa
mining a tray of rings and were being served by the woman assistant. As so
on as they came in, the assistant pressed a bell under the counter and Har
ry Gold emerged through the door at the back. "Yes," he said to William Ha
ddock and the sister. "Can I help you?"
"Would you mind telling us what this is worth?" William Haddock said, pl
acing the stone on a piece of green cloth that lay on the counter.
Harry Gold stopped dead. He stared at the stone. Then he looked up at
the young man and woman who stood before him. He was thinking very fast. S
teady now, he told himself. Don't do anything silly. Act natural.
"Well well," he said as casually as he could. "That looks to me like a
very fine diamond, a very fine diamond indeed. Would you mind waiting a mom
ent while I weigh it and examine it carefully in my office. Then perhaps I'
ll be able to give you an accurate valuation. Do sit down, both of you."
Harry Gold scuttled back into his office with the diamond in his hand.
Immediately, he took it to the electronic scale and weighed it. Fifteen poi
nt two seven carats. That was exactly the weight of Mr Robert Sandy's stone
! He had been certain it was the same one the moment he saw it. Who could m
istake a diamond like that? And now the weight had proved it. His instinct
was to call the police right away, but he was a cautious man who did not li

ke making mistakes. Perhaps the doctor had already sold his diamond. Perhap
s he had given it to his children. Who knows?
Quickly he picked up the Oxford telephone book. The Radcliffe Infirmar
y was Oxford 249891. He dialled it. He asked for Mr Robert Sandy. He got R
obert's secretary. He told her it was most urgent that he speak to Mr Sand
y this instant. The secretary said, "Hold on, please." She called the Oper
ating Theatre. Mr Sandy had gone home half an hour ago, they told her. She
took up the outside phone and relayed this information to Mr Gold.
"What's his home number?" Mr Gold asked her.
"Is this to do with a patient?"
"No!" cried Harry Gold. "It's to do with a robbery! For heaven's sake,
woman, give me that number quickly!"
"Who is speaking, please?"
"Harry Gold! I'm the jeweller in The High! Don't waste time, I beg you!"
She gave him the number.
Harry Gold dialled again.
"Mr Sandy?"
"Speaking."
"This is Harry Gold, Mr Sandy, the jeweller. Have you by any chance lo
st your diamond?"
"Yes, I have."
"Two people have just brought it into my shop," Harry Gold whispered e
xcitedly. "A man and a woman. Youngish. They're trying to get it valued. T
hey're waiting out there now."
"Are you certain it's my stone?"
"Positive. I weighed it."
"Keep them there, Mr Gold!" Robert Sandy cried. "Talk to them! Humour
them! Do anything! I'm calling the police!"
Robert Sandy called the police station. Within seconds, he was giving th
e news to the Detective Inspector who was in charge of the case. "Get there
fast and you'll catch them both!" he said. "I'm on my way, too!"
"Come on, darling!" he shouted to his wife. "Jump in the car. I think the
y've found our diamond and the thieves are in Harry Gold's shop right now try
ing to sell it!"
When Robert and Betty Sandy drove up to Harry Gold's shop nine minutes
later, two police cars were already parked outside. "Come on, darling," Rob
ert said. "Let's go in and see what's happening."
There was a good deal of activity inside the shop when Robert and Bett
y Sandy rushed in. Two policemen and two plain-clothes detectives, one of
them the Inspector, were surrounding a furious William Haddock and an even
more furious theatre sister. Both the young surgeon and the theatre siste
r were handcuffed.

"You found it where?" the Inspector was saying.
"Take these damn handcuffs off me!" the sister was shouting. "How dare
you do this!"
"Tell us again where you found it," the Inspector said, caustic.
"In someone's stomach!" William Haddock yelled back at him. "I've told
you twice!"
"Don't give me that crap!" the Inspector said.
"Good God, William!" Robert Sandy cried as he came in and saw who it
was. "And Sister Wyman! What on earth are you two doing here?"
"They had the diamond," the Inspector said. "They were trying to flog i
t. Do you know these people, Mr Sandy?"
It didn't take very long for William Haddock to explain to Robert Sandy
, and indeed to the Inspector, exactly how and where the diamond had been f
ound.
"Remove their handcuffs, for heaven's sake, Inspector," Robert Sandy said
. "They're telling the truth. The man you want, at least one of the men you w
ant, is in the hospital right now, just coming round from his anaesthetic. Is
n't that right, William?"
"Correct," William Haddock said. "His name is John Diggs. He'll be in on
e of the surgical wards."
Harry Gold stepped forward. "Here's your diamond, Mr Sandy," he said.
"Now listen," the theatre sister said, still angry, "would someone for G
od's sake tell me how that patient came to swallow a diamond like this witho
ut knowing he'd done it?"
"I think I can guess," Robert Sandy said. "He allowed himself the luxury
of putting ice in his drink. Then he got very drunk. Then he swallowed a pi
ece of half-melted ice."
"I still don't get it," the sister said.
"I'll tell you the rest later," Robert Sandy said. "In fact, why don't we al
l go round the corner and have a drink ourselves."

TWENTY-THREE TALES
BY TOLSTOY
TRANSLATED BY

L. AND A. MAUDE
Originally published by
FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK
1907
Scanned and edited by Harry Plantinga, 1995
This etext is in the public domain.

PREFACE
THIS volume is divided into seven parts.
First we have Tales for Children, published about the year 1872, and
reminding us of the time when Tolstoy was absorbed in efforts to educate the
peasant children. This section of the book contains the two stories which of all
that he has written Tolstoy likes best. In What is Art? he claims no place among
examples of good art for any of his own productions 'except for the story God sees
the Truth, but Waits, which seeks a place in the first class (religious art), and A
Prisoner in the Caucasus, which belongs to the second (universal art).' In the first of
these the subject (a favourite one with Tolstoy) is the forgiveness of injuries. The
second deals with the simplest feelings common to all men: fear and courage,
pity, endurance, &c.' expressed with that individuality, clearness, and sincerity,
which Tolstoy says are the signs of true art.
Part II contains a series of stories written for the people; and among them
What Men Live By, probably the most widely circulated of all Tolstoy's tales. It is
founded on the oft-repeated legend of an angel sent by God to live for a while
among men.
Part III consists of a Fairy Tale, Iván the Fool, which contains in popular
form Tolstoy's indictment of militarism and commercialism.
Part IV contains three short stories written to help the sale of cheap
reproductions of some good drawings; Tolstoy having for many years been
anxious by all means in his power to further the circulation, at a cheap price, of
good works of pictorial as well as literary art.
In Part V we have a series of Russian Folk-Tales. The gems of this
collection are the temperance story, The Imp and the Crust, the anti-war story, The
Empty Drum, and another story, How Much Land does a Man Need? which deals
with a peasant's greed for land. A Grain as big as a Hen's Egg and The Godson are
highly characteristic of the spirit of the Russian peasantry, and supply a glimpse
of the sources from whence Tolstoy imbibed many of his own spiritual
sympathies and antipathies.
Part VI gives two adaptations from the French which have appeared in no
previous English edition of Tolstoy's works. They are not merely translations, for
to some extent Tolstoy when translating them, modified them and made them his
own.
Part VII consists of stories Tolstoy contributed in aid of the Jews left
destitute after the massacres and outrages in Kishinéf and elsewhere in Russia in
1903, -- outrages which were forerunners of the yet more terrible Jewish
massacres of 1905.
The importance Tolstoy attributes to literature of the kind contained in
this volume, is shown by the following passage in What is Art? -'The artist of the future will understand that to compose a fairy tale, a
little song which will touch a lullaby or a riddle which will entertain, a jest
2

which will amuse, or to draw a sketch such as will delight dozens of
generations or millions of children and adults, is incomparably more
important and more fruitful than to compose a novel, or a symphony, or
paint a picture, of the kind which diverts some members of the wealthy
classes for a short time and is then for ever forgotten. The region of this art
of the simplest feelings accessible to all is enormous, and it is as yet almost
untouched.'
The sections of the book have been arranged in chronological order. The
date when each story was published is given. The translations are new ones, and
for the footnotes I am responsible.
AYLMER MAUDE.
GREAT BADDOW
CHELMSFORD.
February 1, 1906.

3

CONTENTS
PREFACE
PART I: TALES FOR CHILDREN: PUBLISHED ABOUT 1872.
1. GOD SEES THE TRUTH, BUT WAITS
2. A PRISONER IN THE CAUCASUS
3. THE BEAR-HUNT
PART II: POPULAR STORIES.
4. WHAT MEN LIVE BY (1881)
5. A SPARK NEGLECTED BURNS THE HOUSE (1885)
6. TWO OLD MEN (1885)
7. WHERE LOVE IS, GOD IS (1885)
PART III: A FAIRY TALE.
8. THE STORY OF IVÁN THE FOOL (1885)
PART IV: STORIES WRITTEN TO PICTURES (1885).
9. EVIL ALLURES, BUT GOOD ENDURES
10. LITTLE GIRLS WISER THAN MEN
11. ILYÁS
PART V: FOLK-TALES RETOLD.
12. THE THREE HERMITS (1886)
13. THE IMP AND THE CRUST (1886)
14. HOW MUCH LAND DOES A MAN NEED? (1886)
15. A GRAIN AS BIG AS A HEN'S EGG (1886)
16. THE GODSON (1886)
17. THE REPENTANT SINNER (1886)
18. THE EMPTY DRUM (1891)
PART VI: ADAPTATIONS FROM THE FRENCH.
19. THE COFFEE HOUSE OF SURAT (1893)
20. TOO DEAR (1897)
PART VII: STORIES GIVEN TO AID THE PERSECUTED JEWS (1903).
21. ESARHADDON, KING OF ASSYRIA
22. WORK, DEATH AND SICKNESS
23. THREE QUESTIONS
4

TALES FOR CHILDREN
1

GOD SEES THE TRUTH, BUT WAITS
IN the town of Vladímir lived a young merchant named Iván Dmítritch
Aksyónof. He had two shops and a house of his own.
Aksyónof was a handsome, fair-haired, curly-headed fellow, full of fun,
and very fond of singing. When quite a young man he had been given to drink,
and was riotous when he had had too much, but after he married he gave up
drinking, except now and then.
One summer Aksyónof was going to the Nízhny Fair, and as he bade
good-bye to his family his wife said to him, 'Iván Dmítritch, do not start to-day; I
have had a bad dream about you.'
Aksyónof laughed, and said, 'You are afraid that when I get to the fair I
shall go on the spree.'
His wife replied: 'I do not know what I am afraid of; all I know is that I
had a bad dream. I dreamt you returned from the town, and when you took off
your cap I saw that your hair was quite grey.'
Aksyónof laughed. 'That's a lucky sign,' said he. 'See if I don't sell out all
my goods, and bring you some presents from the fair.'
So he said good-bye to his family, and drove away.
When he had travelled half-way, he met a merchant whom he knew, and
they put up at the same inn for the night. They had some tea together, and then
went to bed in adjoining rooms.
It was not Aksyónof's habit to sleep late, and, wishing to travel while it
was still cool, he aroused his driver before dawn, and told him to put in the
horses.
Then he made his way across to the landlord of the inn (who lived in a
cottage at the back), paid his bill, and continued his journey.
When he had gone about twenty-five miles, he stopped for the horses to
be fed. Aksyónof rested awhile in the passage of the inn, then he stepped out into
the porch and, ordering a samovár1 to be heated got out his guitar and began to
play.
Suddenly a tróyka2 drove up with tinkling bells, and an official alighted,
followed by two soldiers. He came to Aksyónof and began to question him,
asking him who he was and whence he came. Aksyónof answered him fully, and
said, 'Won't you have some tea with me?' But the official went on crossquestioning him and asking him, 'Where did you spend last night? Were you
alone, or with a fellow-merchant? Did you see the other merchant this morning?
Why did you leave the inn before dawn?'

1 The samovár ('self-boiler') is an urn in which water can be heated and kept on the boil.
2 A three-horse conveyance.

5

Aksyónof wondered why he was asked all these questions, but he
described all that had happened, and then added, 'Why do you cross-question
me as if I were a thief or a robber? I am travelling on business of my own, and
there is no need to question me.'
Then the official, calling the soldiers, said, 'I am the police-officer of this
district, and I question you because the merchant with whom you spent last
night has been found with his throat cut. We must search your things.'
They entered the house. The soldiers and the police-officer unstrapped
Aksyónof's luggage and searched it. Suddenly the officer drew a knife out of a
bag, crying, 'Whose knife is this?'
Aksyónof looked, and seeing a blood-stained knife taken from his bag, he
was frightened.
'How is it there is blood on this knife?'
Aksyónof tried to answer, but could hardly utter a word, and only
stammered: 'I -- I don't know -- not mine.'
Then the police-officer said, 'This morning the merchant was found in bed
with his throat cut. You are the only person who could have done it. The house
was locked from inside, and no one else was there. Here is this bloodstained
knife in your bag, and your face and manner betray you! Tell me how you killed
him, and how much money you stole?'
Aksyónof swore he had not done it; that he had not seen the merchant
after they had had tea together; that he had no money except eight thousand
roubles3 of his own, and that the knife was not his. But his voice was broken, his
face pale, and he trembled with fear as though he were guilty.
The police-officer ordered the soldiers to bind Aksyónof and to put him in
the cart. As they tied his feet together and flung him into the cart, Aksyónof
crossed himself and wept. His money and goods were taken from him, and he
was sent to the nearest town and imprisoned there. Enquiries as to his character
were made in Vladímir. The merchants and other inhabitants of that town said
that in former days he used to drink and waste his time, but that he was a good
man. Then the trial came on: he was charged with murdering a merchant from
Ryazán, and robbing him of twenty thousand roubles.
His wife was in despair, and did not know what to believe. Her children
were all quite small; one was a baby at her breast. Taking them all with her, she
went to the town where her husband was in gaol. At first she was not allowed to
see him; but, after much begging, she obtained permission from the officials, and
was taken to him. When she saw her husband in prison-dress and in chains, shut
up with thieves and criminals, she fell down, and did not come to her senses for
a long time. Then she drew her children to her, and sat down near him. She told
him of things at home, and asked about what had happened to him. He told her
all, and she asked, 'What can we do now?'
'We must petition the Tsar not to let an innocent man perish.'
His wife told him that she had sent a petition to the Tsar, but that it had
not been accepted.
3 The value of the rouble has varied at different times from more than three shillings to less than

two shillings. For the purposes of ready calculation it may be taken as two shillings. In reading
these stories to children, the word 'florin' can be substituted for 'rouble' if prefered.

6

Aksyónof did not reply, but only looked downcast.
Then his wife said, 'It was not for nothing I dreamt your hair had turned
grey. You remember? You should not have started that day.' And passing her
fingers through his hair, she said: 'Ványa dearest, tell your wife the truth; was it
not you who did it?'
'So you, too, suspect me!' said Aksyónof, and hiding his face in his hands,
he began to weep. Then a soldier came to say that the wife and children must go
away; and Aksyónof said good-bye to his family for the last time.
When they were gone, Aksyónof recalled what had been said, and when
he remembered that his wife also had suspected him, he said to himself, 'It seems
that only God can know the truth, it is to Him alone we must appeal, and from
Him alone expect mercy.'
And Aksyónof wrote no more petitions; gave up all hope, and only
prayed to God.
Aksyónof was condemned to be flogged and sent to the mines. So he was
flogged with a knout, and when the wounds made by the knout were healed, he
was driven to Siberia with other convicts.
For twenty-six years Aksyónof lived as a convict in Siberia. His hair
turned white as snow and his beard grew long, thin, and grey. All his mirth
went; he stooped; he walked slowly, spoke little, and never laughed, but he often
prayed.
In prison Aksyónof learnt to make boots, and earned a little money, with
which he bought The Lives of the Saints. He read this book when there was light
enough in the prison; and on Sundays in the prison-church he read the lessons
and sang in the choir; for his voice was still good.
The prison authorities liked Aksyónof for his meekness, and his fellowprisoners respected him: they called him 'Grandfather,' and 'The Saint.' When
they wanted to petition the prison authorities about anything, they always made
Aksyónof their spokesman, and when there were quarrels among the prisoners
they came to him to put things right, and to judge the matter.
No news reached Aksyónof from his home, and he did not even know if
his wife and children were still alive.
One day a fresh gang of convicts came to the prison. In the evening the old
prisoners collected round the new ones and asked them what towns or villages
they came from, and what they were sentenced for. Among the rest Aksyónof sat
down near the new-comers, and listened with downcast air to what was said.
One of the new convicts, a tall, strong man of sixty, with a closely-cropped
grey beard, was telling the others what he had been arrested for.
'Well, friends,' he said, 'I only took a horse that was tied to a sledge, and I
was arrested and accused of stealing. I said I had only taken it to get home
quicker, and had then let it go; besides, the driver was a personal friend of mine.
So I said, "It's all right." "No," said they, "you stole it." But how or where I stole it
they could not say. I once really did something wrong, and ought by rights to
have come here long ago, but that time I was not found out. Now I have been
sent here for nothing at all. . . . Eh, but it's lies I'm telling you; I've been to Siberia
before, but I did not stay long.'
'Where are you from?' asked some one.
7

'From Vladímir. My family are of that town. My name is Makár, and they
also call me Semyónitch.'
Aksyónof raised his head and said: 'Tell me, Semyónitch, do you know
anything of the merchants Aksyónof, of Vladímir? Are they still alive?'
'Know them? Of course I do. The Aksyónofs are rich, though their father is
in Siberia: a sinner like ourselves, it seems! As for you, Gran'dad, how did you
come here?'
Aksyónof did not like to speak of his misfortune. He only sighed, and
said, 'For my sins I have been in prison these twenty-six years.'
'What sins?' asked Makár Semyónitch.
But Aksyónof only said, 'Well, well -- I must have deserved it!' He would
have said no more, but his companions told the new-comer how Aksyónof came
to be in Siberia: how some one had killed a merchant and had put a knife among
Aksyónof's things, and Aksyónof had been unjustly condemned.
When Makár Semyónitch heard this, he looked at Aksyónof, slapped his
own knee, and exclaimed, 'Well this is wonderful! Really wonderful! But how old
you've grown, Gran'dad!'
The others asked him why he was so surprised, and where he had seen
Aksyónof before; but Makár Semyónitch did not reply. He only said: 'It's
wonderful that we should meet here, lads!'
These words made Aksyónof wonder whether this man knew who had
killed the merchant; so he said 'Perhaps, Semyónitch, you have heard of that
affair or maybe you've seen me before?'
'How could I help hearing? The world's full of rumours. But it's long ago,
and I've forgotten what I heard.'
'Perhaps you heard who killed the merchant?' asked Aksyónof.
Makár Semyónitch laughed, and replied, 'It must have been him in whose
bag the knife was found! If some one else hid the knife there, "He's not a thief till
he's caught," as the saying is. How could any one put a knife into your bag while
it was under your head? It would surely have woke you up?'
When Aksyónof heard these words, he felt sure this was the man who had
killed the merchant. He rose and went away. All that night Aksyónof lay awake.
He felt terribly unhappy, and all sorts of images rose in his mind. There
was the image of his wife as she was when he parted from her to go to the fair.
He saw her as if she were present; her face and her eyes rose before him; he
heard her speak and laugh. Then he saw his children, quite little, as they were at
that time: one with a little cloak on, another at his mother's breast. And then he
remembered himself as he used to be -- young and merry. He remembered how
he sat playing the guitar in the porch of the inn where he was arrested, and how
free from care he had been. He saw, in his mind, the place where he was flogged,
the executioner, and the people standing around; the chains, the convicts, all the
twenty-six years of his prison life, and his premature old age. The thought of it
all made him so wretched that he was ready to kill himself.
'And it's all that villain's doing!' thought Aksyónof. And his anger was so
great against Makár Semyónitch that he longed for vengeance, even if he himself
should perish for it. He kept repeating prayers all night, but could get no peace.
During the day he did not go near Makár Semyónitch, nor even look at him.
8

A fortnight passed in this way. Aksyónof could not sleep at nights, and
was so miserable that he did not know what to do.
One night as he was walking about the prison he noticed some earth that
came rolling out from under one of the shelves on which the prisoners slept. He
stopped to see what it was. Suddenly Makár Semyónitch crept out from under
the shelf, and looked up at Aksyónof with frightened face. Aksyónof tried to pass
without looking at him, but Makár seized his hand and told him that he had dug
a hole under the wall, getting rid of the earth by putting it into his high-boots,
and emptying it out every day on the road when the prisoners were driven to
their work.
'Just you keep quiet, old man, and you shall get out too. If you blab they'll
flog the life out of me, but I will kill you first.'
Aksyónof trembled with anger as he looked at his enemy. He drew his
hand away, saying, 'I have no wish to escape, and you have no need to kill me;
you killed me long ago! As to telling of you -- I may do so or not, as God shall
direct.'
Next day, when the convicts were led out to work, the convoy soldiers
noticed that one or other of the prisoners emptied some earth out of his boots.
The prison was searched, and the tunnel found. The Governor came and
questioned all the prisoners to find out who had dug the hole. They all denied
any knowledge of it. Those who knew, would not betray Makár Semyónitch,
knowing he would be flogged almost to death. At last the Governor turned to
Aksyónof, whom he knew to be a just man, and said:
'You are a truthful old man; tell me, before God, who dug the hole?'
Makár Semyónitch stood as if he were quite unconcerned, looking at the
Governor and not so much as glancing at Aksyónof. Aksyónof's lips and hands
trembled, and for a long time he could not utter a word. He thought, 'Why
should I screen him who ruined my life? Let him pay for what I have suffered.
But if I tell, they will probably flog the life out of him and maybe I suspect him
wrongly. And, after all, what good would it be to me?'
'Well, old man,' repeated the Governor, 'tell us the truth: who has been
digging under the wall?'
Aksyónof glanced at Makár Semyónitch, and said 'I cannot say, your
honour. It is not God's will that I should tell! Do what you like with me; I am in
your hands.'
However much the Governor tried, Aksyónof would say no more, and so
the matter had to be left.
That night, when Aksyónof was lying on his bed and just beginning to
doze, some one came quietly and sat down on his bed. He peered through the
darkness and recognized Makár.
'What more do you want of me?' asked Aksyónof. 'Why have you come
here?'
Makár Semyónitch was silent. So Aksyónof sat up and said, 'What do you
want? Go away, or I will call the guard!'
Makár Semyónitch bent close over Aksyónof, and whispered, 'Iván
Dmítritch, forgive me!'
'What for?' asked Aksyónof.
9

'It was I who killed the merchant and hid the knife among your things. I
meant to kill you too, but I heard a noise outside; so I hid the knife in your bag
and escaped out of the window.'
Aksyónof was silent, and did not know what to say. Makár Semyónitch
slid off the bed-shelf and knelt upon the ground. 'Iván Dmítritch,' said he,
'forgive me! For the love of God, forgive me! I will confess that it was I who
killed the merchant, and you will be released and can go to your home.'
'It is easy for you to talk,' said Aksyónof, 'but I have suffered for you these
twenty-six years. Where could I go to now? . . . My wife is dead, and my children
have forgotten me. I have nowhere to go. . . .'
Makár Semyónitch did not rise, but beat his head on the floor. 'Iván
Dmítritch, forgive me!' he cried. 'When they flogged me with the knout it was not
so hard to bear as it is to see you now . . . yet you had pity on me, and did not
tell. For Christ's sake forgive me, wretch that I am!' And he began to sob.
When Aksyónof heard him sobbing he, too, began to weep.
'God will forgive you!' said he. 'Maybe I am a hundred times worse than
you.' And at these words his heart grew light, and the longing for home left him.
He no longer had any desire to leave the prison, but only hoped for his last hour
to come.
In spite of what Aksyónof had said, Maker Semyónitch confessed his guilt.
But when the order for his release came, Aksyónof was already dead.
(Written in 1872.)

10

2

A PRISONER IN THE CAUCASUS
I
AN officer named Zhílin was serving in the army in the Caucasus.
One day he received a letter from home. It was from his mother, who
wrote: 'I am getting old, and should like to see my dear son once more before I
die. Come and say good-bye to me and bury me, and then, if God pleases, return
to service again with my blessing. But I have found a girl for you, who is sensible
and good and has some property. If you can love her, you might marry her and
remain at home.'
Zhílin thought it over. It was quite true, the old lady was failing fast and
he might not have another chance to see her alive. He had better go, and, if the
girl was nice, why not marry her?
So he went to his Colonel, obtained leave of absence, said good-bye to his
comrades, stood the soldiers four pailfuls of vódka4 as a farewell treat, and got
ready to go.
It was a time of war in the Caucasus. The roads were not safe by night or
day. If ever a Russian ventured to ride or walk any distance away from his fort,
the Tartars killed him or carried him off to the hills. So it had been arranged that
twice every week a body of soldiers should march from one fortress to the next to
convoy travellers from point to point.
It was summer. At daybreak the baggage-train got ready under shelter of
the fortress; the soldiers marched out; and all started along the road. Zhílin was
on horseback, and a cart with his things went with the baggage-train. They had
sixteen miles to go. The baggage-train moved slowly; sometimes the soldiers
stopped, or perhaps a wheel would come off one of the carts, or a horse refuse to
go on, and then everybody had to wait.
When by the sun it was already past noon, they had not gone half the way.
It was dusty and hot, the sun was scorching and there was no shelter anywhere:
a bare plain all round -- not a tree, not a bush, by the road.
Zhílin rode on in front, and stopped, waiting for the baggage to overtake
him. Then he heard the signal-horn sounded behind him: the company had again
stopped. So he began to think: 'Hadn't I better ride on by myself? My horse is a
good one: if the Tartars do attack me, I can gallop away. Perhaps, however, it
would be wiser to wait.'
As he sat considering, Kostílin, an officer carrying a gun, rode up to him
and said:
'Come along, Zhílin, let's go on by ourselves. It's dreadful; I am famished,
and the heat is terrible. My shirt is wringing wet.'
Kostílin was a stout, heavy man, and the perspiration was running down
his red face. Zhílin thought awhile, and then asked: 'Is your gun loaded?'
4 Vódka is a spirit distilled from rye. It is the commonest form of strong drink in Russia.

11

'Yes it is.'
'Well, then, let's go, but on condition that we keep together.'
So they rode forward along the road across the plain, talking, but keeping
a look-out on both sides. They could see afar all round. But after crossing the
plain the road ran through a valley between two hills, and Zhílin said: 'We had
better climb that hill and have a look round, or the Tartars may be on us before
we know it.'
But Kostílin answered: 'What's the use? Let us go on.'
Zhílin, however, would not agree.
'No,' he said; 'you can wait here if you like, but I'll go and look round.'
And he turned his horse to the left, up the hill. Zhílin's horse was a hunter, and
carried him up the hillside as if it had wings. (He had bought it for a hundred
roubles as a colt out of a herd, and had broken it in himself.) Hardly had he
reached the top of the hill, when he saw some thirty Tartars not much more than
a hundred yards ahead of him. As soon as he caught sight of them he turned
round but the Tartars had also seen him, and rushed after him at full gallop,
getting their guns out as they went. Down galloped Zhílin as fast as the horse's
legs could go, shouting to Kostílin: 'Get your gun ready!'
And, in thought, he said to his horse: 'Get me well out of this, my pet;
don't stumble, for if you do it's all up. Once I reach the gun, they shan't take me
prisoner.'
But, instead of waiting, Kostílin, as soon as he caught sight of the Tartars,
turned back towards the fortress at full speed, whipping his horse now on one
side now on the other, and its switching tail was all that could be seen of him in
the dust.
Zhílin saw it was a bad look-out; the gun was gone, and what could he do
with nothing but his sword? He turned his horse towards the escort, thinking to
escape, but there were six Tartars rushing to cut him off. His horse was a good
one, but theirs were still better; and besides, they were across his path. He tried
to rein in his horse and to turn another way, but it was going so fast it could not
stop, and dashed on straight towards the Tartars. He saw a red-bearded Tartar
on a grey horse, with his gun raised, come at him, yelling and showing his teeth.
'Ah,' thought Zhílin, 'I know you, devils that you are. If you take me alive,
you'll put me in a pit and flog me. I will not be taken alive!'
Zhílin, though not a big fellow, was brave. He drew his sword and dashed
at the red-bearded Tartar thinking: 'Either I'll ride him down, or disable him with
my sword.'
He was still a horse's length away from him, when he was fired at from
behind, and his horse was hit. It fell to the ground with all its weight, pinning
Zhílin to the earth.
He tried to rise, but two ill-savoured Tartars were already sitting on him
and binding his hands behind his back. He made an effort and flung them off,
but three others jumped from their horses and began beating his head with the
butts of their guns. His eyes grew dim, and he fell back. The Tartars seized him,
and, taking spare girths from their saddles, twisted his hands behind him and
tied them with a Tartar knot. They knocked his cap off, pulled off his boots,
searched him all over, tore his clothes, and took his money and his watch.
12

Zhílin looked round at his horse. There it lay on its side, poor thing, just as
it had fallen; struggling, its legs in the air, unable to touch the ground. There was
a hole in its head, and black blood was pouring out, turning the dust to mud for
a couple of feet around.
One of the Tartars went up to the horse and began taking the saddle off, it
still kicked, so he drew a dagger and cut its windpipe. A whistling sound came
from its throat, the horse gave one plunge, and all was over.
The Tartars took the saddle and trappings. The red-bearded Tartar
mounted his horse, and the others lifted Zhílin into the saddle behind him. To
prevent his falling off, they strapped him to the Tartar's girdle; and then they all
rode away to the hills.
So there sat Zhílin, swaying from side to side, his head striking against the
Tartar's stinking back. He could see nothing but that muscular back and sinewy
neck, with its closely shaven, bluish nape. Zhílin's head was wounded: the blood
had dried over his eyes, and he could neither shift his position on the saddle nor
wipe the blood off. His arms were bound so tightly that his collar-bones ached.
They rode up and down hills for a long way. Then they reached a river
which they forded, and came to a hard road leading across a valley.
Zhílin tried to see where they were going, but his eyelids were stuck
together with blood, and he could not turn.
Twilight began to fall; they crossed another river and rode up a stony
hillside. There was a smell of smoke here, and dogs were barking. They had
reached an Aoul (a Tartar village). The Tartars got off their horses; Tartar
children came and stood round Zhílin, shrieking with pleasure and throwing
stones at him.
The Tartar drove the children away, took Zhílin off the horse, and called
his man. A Nogáy5 with high cheek-bones, and nothing on but a shirt (and that
so torn that his breast was all bare), answered the call. The Tartar gave him an
order. He went and fetched shackles: two blocks of oak with iron rings attached,
and a clasp and lock fixed to one of the rings.
They untied Zhílin's arms, fastened the shackles on his leg, and dragged
him to a barn, where they pushed him in and locked the door.
Zhílin fell on a heap of manure. He lay still awhile then groped about to
find a soft place, and settled down.
II
That night Zhílin hardly slept at all. It was the time of year when the
nights are short, and daylight soon showed itself through a chink in the wall. He
rose, scratched to make the chink bigger, and peeped out.
Through the hole he saw a road leading down-hill; to the right was a
Tartar hut with two trees near it, a black dog lay on the threshold, and a goat and
kids were moving about wagging their tails. Then he saw a young Tartar woman
in a long, loose, bright-coloured gown, with trousers and high boots showing
from under it. She had a coat thrown over her head, on which she carried a large
5 One of a certain Tartar tribe.

13

metal jug filled with water. She was leading by the hand a small, closely-shaven
Tartar boy, who wore nothing but a shirt; and as she went along balancing
herself, the muscles of her back quivered. This woman carried the water into the
hut, and, soon after, the red-bearded Tartar of yesterday came out dressed in a
silk tunic, with a silver-hilted dagger hanging by his side, shoes on his bare feet,
and a tall black sheepskin cap set far back on his head. He came out, stretched
himself, and stroked his red beard. He stood awhile, gave an order to his servant,
and went away.
Then two lads rode past from watering their horses. The horses' noses
were wet. Some other closely-shaven boys ran out, without any trousers, and
wearing nothing but their shirts. They crowded together, came to the barn,
picked up a twig, and began pushing it in at the chink. Zhílin gave a shout, and
the boys shrieked and scampered off, their little bare knees gleaming as they ran.
Zhílin was very thirsty: his throat was parched, and he thought: 'If only
they would come and so much as look at me!'
Then he heard some one unlocking the barn. The red-bearded Tartar
entered, and with him was another a smaller man, dark, with bright black eyes,
red cheeks and a short beard. He had a merry face, and was always laughing.
This man was even more richly dressed than the other. He wore a blue silk tunic
trimmed with gold, a large silver dagger in his belt, red morocco slippers worked
with silver, and over these a pair of thick shoes, and he had a white sheepskin
cap on his head.
The red-bearded Tartar entered, muttered something as if he were
annoyed, and stood leaning against the doorpost, playing with his dagger, and
glaring askance at Zhílin, like a wolf. The dark one, quick and lively and moving
as if on springs, came straight up to Zhílin, squatted down in front of him,
slapped him on the shoulder, and began to talk very fast in his own language.
His teeth showed, and he kept winking, clicking his tongue, and repeating, 'Good
Russ, good Russ.'
Zhílin could not understand a word, but said, 'Drink! give me water to
drink!'
The dark man only laughed. 'Good Russ,' he said, and went on talking in
his own tongue.
Zhílin made signs with lips and hands that he wanted something to drink.
The dark man understood, and laughed. Then he looked out of the door,
and called to some one: 'Dina!'
A little girl came running in: she was about thirteen, slight, thin, and like
the dark Tartar in face. Evidently she was his daughter. She, too, had clear black
eyes, and her face was good-looking. She had on a long blue gown with wide
sleeves, and no girdle. The hem of her gown, the front, and the sleeves, were
trimmed with red. She wore trousers and slippers, and over the slippers stouter
shoes with high heels. Round her neck she had a necklace made of Russian silver
coins. She was bareheaded, and her black hair was plaited with a ribbon and
ornamented with gilt braid and silver coins.
Her father gave an order, and she ran away and returned with a metal jug.
She handed the water to Zhílin and sat down, crouching so that her knees were
14

as high as her head, and there she sat with wide open eyes watching Zhílin
drink, as though he were a wild animal.
When Zhílin handed the empty jug back to her, she gave such a sudden
jump back, like a wild goat, that it made her father laugh. He sent her away for
something else. She took the jug, ran out, and brought back some unleavened
bread on a round board, and once more sat down, crouching, and looking on
with staring eves.
Then the Tartars went away and again locked the door.
After a while the Nogáy came and said: 'Ayda, the master, Ayda!'
He, too, knew no Russian. All Zhílin could make out was that he was told
to go somewhere.
Zhílin followed the Nógay, but limped, for the shackles dragged his feet
so that he could hardly step at all. On getting out of the barn he saw a Tartar
village of about ten houses, and a Tartar church with a small tower. Three horses
stood saddled before one of the houses; little boys were holding them by the
reins. The dark Tartar came out of this house, beckoning with his hand for Zhílin
to follow him. Then he laughed, said something in his own language, and
returned into the house.
Zhílin entered. The room was a good one: the walls smoothly plastered
with clay. Near the front wall lay a pile of bright-coloured feather beds; the side
walls were covered with rich carpets used as hangings, and on these were
fastened guns, pistols and swords, all inlaid with silver. Close to one of the walls
was a small stove on a level with the earthen floor. The floor itself was as clean as
a thrashing-ground. A large space in one corner was spread over with felt, on
which were rugs, and on these rugs were cushions stuffed with down. And on
these cushions sat five Tartars, the dark one, the red-haired one, and three guests.
They were wearing their indoor slippers, and each had a cushion behind his
back. Before them were standing millet cakes on a round board, melted butter in
a bowl and a jug of buza, or Tartar beer. They ate both cakes and butter with their
hands.
The dark man jumped up and ordered Zhílin to be placed on one side, not
on the carpet but on the bare ground, then he sat down on the carpet again, and
offered millet cakes and buza to his guests. The servant made Zhílin sit down,
after which he took off his own overshoes, put them by the door where the other
shoes were standing, and sat down nearer to his masters on the felt, watching
them as they ate, and licking his lips.
The Tartars ate as much as they wanted, and a woman dressed in the same
way as the girl -- in a long gown and trousers, with a kerchief on her head -came and took away what was left, and brought a handsome basin, and an ewer
with a narrow spout. The Tartars washed their hands, folded them, went down
on their knees, blew to the four quarters, and said their prayers. After they had
talked for a while, one of the guests turned to Zhílin and began to speak in
Russian.
'You were captured by Kazi-Mohammed,' he said, and pointed at the redbearded Tartar. 'And Kazi-Mohammed has given you to Abdul Murat,' pointing
at the dark one. 'Abdul Murat is now your master.'
15

Zhílin was silent. Then Abdul Murat began to talk, laughing, pointing to
Zhílin, and repeating, 'Soldier Russ, good Russ.'
The interpreter said, 'He orders you to write home and tell them to send a
ransom, and as soon as the money comes he will set you free.'
Zhílin thought for a moment, and said, 'How much ransom does he want?'
The Tartars talked awhile, and then the interpreter said, 'Three thousand
roubles.'
'No,' said Zhílin,' I can't pay so much.'
Abdul jumped up and, waving his arms, talked to Zhílin' thinking, as
before, that he would understand. The interpreter translated: 'How much will
you give?'
Zhílin considered, and said, 'Five hundred roubles.' At this the Tartars
began speaking very quickly, all together. Abdul began to shout at the redbearded one, and jabbered so fast that the spittle spurted out of his mouth. The
red-bearded one only screwed up his eyes and clicked his tongue.
They quietened down after a while, and the interpreter said, 'Five
hundred roubles is not enough for the master. He paid two hundred for you
himself. Kazi-Mohammed was in debt to him, and he took you in payment.
Three thousand roubles! Less than that won't do. If you refuse to write, you will
be put into a pit and flogged with a whip!'
'Eh!' thought Zhílin, 'the more one fears them the worse it will be.'
So he sprang to his feet, and said, 'You tell that dog that if he tries to
frighten me I will not write at all, and he will get nothing. I never was afraid of
you dogs, and never will be!'
The interpreter translated, and again they all began to talk at once.
They jabbered for a long time, and then the dark man jumped up, came to
Zhílin, and said: 'Dzhigit Russ, dzhigit Russ!' (Dzhigit in their language means
'brave.') And he laughed, and said something to the interpreter, who translated:
'One thousand roubles will satisfy him.'
Zhílin stuck to it: 'I will not give more than five hundred. And if you kill
me you'll get nothing at all.'
The Tartars talked awhile, then sent the servant out to fetch something,
and kept looking, now at Zhílin, now at the door. The servant returned, followed
by a stout, bare-footed, tattered man, who also had his leg shackled.
Zhílin gasped with surprise: it was Kostílin. He, too, had been taken. They
were put side by side, and began to tell each other what had occurred. While
they talked, the Tartars looked on in silence. Zhílin related what had happened to
him; and Kostílin told how his horse had stopped, his gun missed fire, and this
same Abdul had overtaken and captured him.
Abdul jumped up, pointed to Kostílin, and said something. The
interpreter translated that they both now belonged to one master, and the one
who first paid the ransom would be set free first.
'There now,' he said to Zhílin, 'you get angry, but your comrade here is
gentle; he has written home, and they will send five thousand roubles. So he will
be well fed and well treated.'

16

Zhílin replied: 'My comrade can do as he likes; maybe he is rich, I am not.
It must be as I said. Kill me, if you like -- you will gain nothing by it; but I will
not write for more than five hundred roubles.'
They were silent. Suddenly up sprang Abdul, brought a little box, took out
a pen, ink, and a bit of paper, gave them to Zhílin, slapped him on the shoulder,
and made a sign that he should write. He had agreed to take five hundred
roubles.
'Wait a bit!' said Zhílin to the interpreter; 'tell him that he must feed us
properly, give us proper clothes and boots, and let us be together. It will be more
cheerful for us. And he must have these shackles taken off our feet,' and Zhílin
looked at his master and laughed.
The master also laughed, heard the interpreter, and said: 'I will give them
the best of clothes: a cloak and boots fit to be married in. I will feed them like
princes; and if they like they can live together in the barn. But I can't take off the
shackles, or they will run away. They shall be taken off, however, at night.' And
he jumped up and slapped Zhílin on the shoulder, exclaiming: 'You good, I
good!'
Zhílin wrote the letter, but addressed it wrongly, so that it should not
reach its destination, thinking to himself: 'I'll run away!'
Zhílin and Kostílin were taken back to the barn and given some maize
straw, a jug of water, some bread, two old cloaks, and some worn-out military
boots -- evidently taken from the corpses of Russian soldiers, At night their
shackles were taken off their feet, and they were locked up in the barn.
III
Zhílin and his friend lived in this way for a whole month. The master
always laughed and said: 'You, Iván, good! I, Abdul, good!' But he fed them
badly giving them nothing but unleavened bread of millet-flour baked into flat
cakes, or sometimes only unbaked dough.
Kostílin wrote home a second time, and did nothing but mope and wait
for the money to arrive. He would sit for days together in the barn sleeping, or
counting the days till a letter could come.
Zhílin knew his letter would reach no one, and he did not write another.
He thought: 'Where could my mother get enough money to ransom me? As it is
she lived chiefly on what I sent her. If she had to raise five hundred roubles, she
would be quite ruined. With God's help I'll manage to escape!'
So he kept on the look-out, planning how to run away.
He would walk about the Aoul whistling; or would sit working,
modelling dolls of clay, or weaving baskets out of twigs: for Zhílin was clever
with his hands.
Once he modelled a doll with a nose and hands and feet and with a Tartar
gown on, and put it up on the roof. When the Tartar women came out to fetch
water, the master's daughter, Dina, saw the doll and called the women, who put
down their jugs and stood looking and laughing. Zhílin took down the doll and
held it out to them. They laughed, but dared not take it. He put down the doll
and went into the barn, waiting to see what would happen.
17

Dina ran up to the doll, looked round, seized it, and ran away.
In the morning, at daybreak, he looked out. Dina came out of the house
and sat down on the threshold with the doll, which she had dressed up in bits of
red stuff, and she rocked it like a baby, singing a Tartar lullaby. An old woman
came out and scolded her, and snatching the doll away she broke it to bits, and
sent Dina about her business.
But Zhílin made another doll, better than the first, and gave it to Dina.
Once Dina brought a little jug, put it on the ground, sat down gazing at him, and
laughed, pointing to the jug.
'What pleases her so?' wondered Zhílin. He took the jug thinking it was
water, but it turned out to be milk. He drank the milk and said: 'That's good!'
How pleased Dina was! 'Good, Iván, good!' said she, and she jumped up
and clapped her hands. Then, seizing the jug, she ran away. After that, she
stealthily brought him some milk every day.
The Tartars make a kind of cheese out of goat's milk, which they dry on
the roofs of their houses; and sometimes, on the sly, she brought him some of this
cheese. And once, when Abdul had killed a sheep she brought Zhílin a bit of
mutton in her sleeve. She would just throw the things down and run away.
One day there was a heavy storm, and the rain fell in torrents for a whole
hour. All the streams became turbid. At the ford, the water rose till it was seven
feet high, and the current was so strong that it rolled the stones about. Rivulets
flowed everywhere, and the rumbling in the hills never ceased. When the storm
was over, the water ran in streams down the village street. Zhílin got his master
to lend him a knife, and with it he shaped a small cylinder, and cutting some
little boards, he made a wheel to which he fixed two dolls, one on each side. The
little girls brought him some bits of stuff, and he dressed the dolls, one as a
peasant, the other as a peasant woman. Then he fastened them in their places,
and set the wheel so that the stream should work it. The wheel began to turn and
the dolls danced.
The whole village collected round. Little boys and girls, Tartar men and
women, all came and clicked their tongues.
'Ah, Russ! Ah, Iván!'
Abdul had a Russian clock, which was broken. He called Zhílin and
showed it to him, clicking his tongue.
'Give it me, I'll mend it for you,' said Zhílin.
He took it to pieces with the knife, sorted the pieces, and put them
together again, so that the clock went all right.
The master was delighted, and made him a present of one of his old tunics
which was all in holes. Zhílin had to accept it. He could, at any rate, use it as a
coverlet at night.
After that Zhílin's fame spread; and Tartars came from distant villages,
bringing him now the lock of a gun or of a pistol, now a watch, to mend. His
master gave him some tools -- pincers, gimlets, and a file.
One day a Tartar fell ill, and they came to Zhílin saying, 'Come and heal
him!' Zhílin knew nothing about doctoring, but he went to look, and thought to
himself, 'Perhaps he will get well anyway.'
18

He returned to the barn, mixed some water with sand, and then in the
presence of the Tartars whispered some words over it and gave it to the sick man
to drink. Luckily for him, the Tartar recovered.
Zhílin began to pick up their language a little, and some of the Tartars
grew familiar with him. When they wanted him, they would call: 'Iván! Iván!'
Others, however, still looked at him askance, as at a wild beast.
The red-bearded Tartar disliked Zhílin. Whenever he saw him he frowned
and turned away, or swore at him. There was also an old man there who did not
live in the Aoul, but used to come up from the foot of the hill. Zhílin only saw
him when he passed on his way to the Mosque. He was short, and had a white
cloth wound round his hat. His beard and moustaches were clipped, and white
as snow; and his face was wrinkled and brick-red. His nose was hooked like a
hawk's, his grey eyes looked cruel, and he had no teeth except two tusks. He
would pass, with his turban on his head, leaning on his staff, and glaring round
him like a wolf. If he saw Zhílin he would snort with anger and turn away.
Once Zhílin descended the hill to see where the old man lived. He went
down along the pathway and came to a little garden surrounded by a stone wall;
and behind the wall he saw cherry and apricot trees, and a hut with a flat roof.
He came closer, and saw hives made of plaited straw, and bees flying about and
humming. The old man was kneeling, busy doing something with a hive. Zhílin
stretched to look, and his shackles rattled. The old man turned round, and,
giving a yell, snatched a pistol from his belt and shot at Zhílin, who just managed
to shelter himself behind the stone wall.
The old man went to Zhílin's master to complain. The master called Zhílin,
and said with a laugh, 'Why did you go to the old man's house?'
'I did him no harm,' replied Zhílin. 'I only wanted to see how he lived.'
The master repeated what Zhílin said.
But the old man was in a rage; he hissed and jabbered, showing his tusks,
and shaking his fists at Zhílin.
Zhílin could not understand all, but he gathered that the old man was
telling Abdul he ought not to keep Russians in the Aoul, but ought to kill them.
At last the old man went away.
Zhílin asked the master who the old man was.
'He is a great man!' said the master. 'He was the bravest of our fellows; he
killed many Russians and was at one time very rich. He had three wives and
eight sons, and they all lived in one village. Then the Russians came and
destroyed the village, and killed seven of his sons. Only one son was left, and he
gave himself up to the Russians. The old man also went and gave himself up,
and lived among the Russians for three months. At the end of that time he found
his son, killed him with his own hands, and then escaped. After that he left off
fighting, and went to Mecca to pray to God; that is why he wears a turban. One
who has been to Mecca is called "Hadji," and wears a turban. He does not like
you fellows. He tells me to kill you. But I can't kill you. I have paid money for
you and, besides, I have grown fond of you, Iván. Far from killing you, I would
not even let you go if I had not promised.' And he laughed, saying in Russian,
'You, Iván, good; I, Abdul, good!'
19

IV
Zhílin lived in this way for a month. During the day he sauntered about
the Aoul or busied himself with some handicraft, but at night, when all was
silent in the Aoul, he dug at the floor of the barn. It was no easy task digging,
because of the stones; but he worked away at them with his file, and at last had
made a hole under the wall large enough to get through.
'If only I could get to know the lay of the land,' thought he, 'and which
way to go! But none of the Tartars will tell me.'
So he chose a day when the master was away from home, and set off after
dinner to climb the hill beyond the village, and to look around. But before
leaving home the master always gave orders to his son to watch Zhílin, and not
to lose sight of him. So the lad ran after Zhílin, shouting: 'Don't go! Father does
not allow it. I'll call the neighbours if you won't come back.'
Zhílin tried to persuade him, and said: 'I'm not going far; I only want to
climb that hill. I want to find a herb -- to cure sick people with. You come with
me if you like. How can I run away with these shackles on? To-morrow I'll make
a bow and arrows for you.'
So he persuaded the lad, and they went. To look at the hill, it did not seem
far to the top; but it was hard walking with shackles on his leg. Zhílin went on
and on, but it was all he could do to reach the top. There he sat down and noted
how the land lay. To the south, beyond the barn, was a valley in which a herd of
horses was pasturing and at the bottom of the valley one could see another Aoul.
Beyond that was a still steeper hill, and another hill beyond that. Between the
hills, in the blue distance, were forests, and still further off were mountains,
rising higher and higher. The highest of them were covered with snow, white as
sugar; and one snowy peak towered above all the rest. To the east and to the
west were other such hills, and here and there smoke rose from Aouls in the
ravines. 'Ah,' thought he, 'all that is Tartar country.' And he turned towards the
Russian side. At his feet he saw a river, and the Aoul he lived in, surrounded by
little gardens. He could see women, like tiny dolls, sitting by the river rinsing
clothes. Beyond the Aoul was a hill, lower than the one to the south, and beyond
it two other hills well wooded; and between these, a smooth bluish plain, and far,
far across the plain something that looked like a cloud of smoke. Zhílin tried to
remember where the sun used to rise and set when he was living in the fort, and
he saw that there was no mistake: the Russian fort must be in that plain. Between
those two hills he would have to make his way when he escaped.
The sun was beginning to set. The white, snowy mountains turned red,
and the dark hills turned darker; mists rose from the ravine, and the valley,
where he supposed the Russian fort to be, seemed on fire with the sunset glow.
Zhílin looked carefully. Something seemed to be quivering in the valley like
smoke from a chimney, and he felt sure the Russian fortress was there.
It had grown late. The Mullah's cry was heard. The herds were being
driven home, the cows were lowing, and the lad kept saying, 'Come home!' But
Zhílin did not feel inclined to go away.
At last, however, they went back. 'Well,' thought Zhílin, 'now that I know
the way, it is time to escape.' He thought of running away that night. The nights
20

were dark -- the moon had waned. But as ill-luck would have it, the Tartars
returned home that evening. They generally came back driving cattle before
them and in good spirits. But this time they had no cattle. All they brought home
was the dead body of a Tartar -- the red one's brother -- who had been killed.
They came back looking sullen, and they all gathered together for the burial.
Zhílin also came out to see it.
They wrapped the body in a piece of linen, without any coffin, and carried
it out of the village, and laid it on the grass under some plane-trees. The Mullah
and the old men came. They wound clothes round their caps, took off their shoes,
and squatted on their heels, side by side, near the corpse.
The Mullah was in front: behind him in a row were three old men in
turbans, and behind them again the other Tartars. All cast down their eyes and
sat in silence. This continued a long time, until the Mullah raised his head and
said: 'Allah!' (which means God). He said that one word, and they all cast down
their eyes again, and were again silent for a long time. They sat quite still, not
moving or making any sound.
Again the Mullah lifted his head and said, 'Allah!' and they all repeated:
'Allah! Allah!' and were again silent.
The dead body lay immovable on the grass, and they sat as still as if they
too were dead. Not one of them moved. There was no sound but that of the
leaves of the plane-trees stirring in the breeze. Then the Mullah repeated a
prayer, and they all rose. They lifted the body and carried it in their arms to a
hole in the ground. It was not an ordinary hole, but was hollowed out under the
ground like a vault. They took the body under the arms and by the legs, bent it,
and let it gently down, pushing it under the earth in a sitting posture, with the
hands folded in front.
The Nogáy brought some green rushes, which they stuffed into the hole,
and, quickly covering it with earth, they smoothed the ground, and set an
upright stone at the head of the grave. Then they trod the earth down, and again
sat in a row before the grave, keeping silence for a long time.
At last they rose, said 'Allah! Allah! Allah!' and sighed.
The red-bearded Tartar gave money to the old men; then he too rose, took
a whip, struck himself with it three times on the forehead, and went home.
The next morning Zhílin saw the red Tartar, followed by three others,
leading a mare out of the village. When they were beyond the village, the redbearded Tartar took off his tunic and turned up his sleeves, showing his stout
arms. Then he drew a dagger and sharpened it on a whetstone. The other Tartars
raised the mare's head, and he cut her throat, threw her down and began
skinning her, loosening the hide with his big hands. Women and girls came and
began to wash the entrails and the inwards. The mare was cut up, the pieces
taken into the hut, and the whole village collected at the red Tartar's hut for a
funeral feast.
For three days they went on eating the flesh of the mare, drinking buza,
and praying for the dead man. All the Tartars were at home. On the fourth day at
dinner-time Zhílin saw them preparing to go away. Horses were brought out,
they got ready, and some ten of them (the red one among them) rode away; but
Abdul stayed at home. It was new moon, and the nights were still dark.
21

'Ah!' thought Zhílin, 'to-night is the time to escape.' And he told Kostílin;
but Kostílin's heart failed him.
'How can we escape?' he said. 'We don't even know the way.'
'I know the way,' said Zhílin.
'Even if you do'' said Kostílin, 'we can't reach the fort in one night.'
'If we can't,' said Zhílin, 'we'll sleep in the forest. See here, I have saved
some cheeses. What's the good of sitting and moping here? If they send your
ransom -- well and good; but suppose they don't manage to collect it? The
Tartars are angry now, because the Russians have killed one of their men. They
are talking of killing us.'
Kostílin thought it over.
'Well, let's go,' said he.
V
Zhílin crept into the hole, widened it so that Kostílin might also get
through, and then they both sat waiting till all should be quiet in the Aoul.
As soon as all was quiet, Zhílin crept under the wall, got out, and
whispered to Kostílin, 'Come!' Kostílin crept out, but in so doing he caught a
stone with his foot and made a noise. The master had a very vicious watch-dog, a
spotted one called Oulyashin. Zhílin had been careful to feed him for some time
before. Oulyashin heard the noise and began to bark and jump, and the other
dogs did the same. Zhílin gave a slight whistle, and threw him a bit of cheese.
Oulyashin knew Zhílin, wagged his tail, and stopped barking.
But the master had heard the dog, and shouted to him from his hut, 'Hayt,
hayt, Oulyashin!'
Zhílin, however, scratched Oulyashin behind the ears, and the dog was
quiet, and rubbed against his legs, wagging his tail
They sat hidden behind a corner for awhile. All became silent again, only
a sheep coughed inside a shed, and the water rippled over the stones in the
hollow. It was dark, the stars were high overhead, and the new moon showed
red as it set, horns upward, behind the hill. In the valleys the fog was white as
milk.
Zhílin rose and said to his companion, 'Well, friend, come along!'
They started; but they had only gone a few steps when they heard the
Mullah crying from the roof, 'Allah, Beshmillah! Ilrahman!' That meant that the
people would be going to the Mosque. So they sat down again, hiding behind a
wall, and waited a long time till the people had passed. At last all was quiet
again.
'Now then! May God be with us!' They crossed themselves, and started
once more. They passed through a yard and went down the hillside to the river,
crossed the river, and went along the valley.
The mist was thick, but only near the ground; overhead the stars shone
quite brightly. Zhílin directed their course by the stars. It was cool in the mist,
and easy walking, only their boots were uncomfortable, being worn out and
trodden down. Zhílin took his off, threw them away, and went barefoot, jumping
22

from stone to stone, and guiding his course by the stars. Kostílin began to lag
behind.
'Walk slower,' he said, 'these confounded boots have quite blistered my
feet.'
'Take them off!' said Zhílin. 'It will be easier walking without them.'
Kostílin went barefoot, but got on still worse. The stones cut his feet and
he kept lagging behind. Zhílin said: 'If your feet get cut, they'll heal again; but if
the Tartars catch us and kill us, it will be worse!'
Kostílin did not reply, but went on, groaning all the time.
Their way lay through the valley for a long time. Then, to the right, they
heard dogs barking. Zhílin stopped, looked about, and began climbing the hill
feeling with his hands.
'Ah!' said he, 'we have gone wrong, and have come too far to the right.
Here is another Aoul, one I saw from the hill. We must turn back and go up that
hill to the left. There must be a wood there.'
But Kostílin said: 'Wait a minute! Let me get breath. My feet are all cut and
bleeding.'
'Never mind, friend! They'll heal again. You should spring more lightly.
Like this!'
And Zhílin ran back and turned to the left up the hill towards the wood.
Kostílin still lagged behind, and groaned. Zhílin only said 'Hush!' and
went on and on.
They went up the hill and found a wood as Zhílin had said. They entered
the wood and forced their way through the brambles, which tore their clothes. At
last they came to a path and followed it.
'Stop!' They heard the tramp of hoofs on the path, and waited, listening. It
sounded like the tramping of a horse's feet, but then ceased. They moved on, and
again they heard the tramping. When they paused, it also stopped. Zhílin crept
nearer to it, and saw something standing on the path where it was not quite so
dark. It looked like a horse, and yet not quite like one, and on it was something
queer, not like a man. He heard it snorting. 'What can it be?' Zhílin gave a low
whistle, and off it dashed from the path into the thicket, and the woods were
filled with the noise of crackling, as if a hurricane were sweeping through,
breaking the branches.
Kostílin was so frightened that he sank to the ground. But Zhílin laughed
and said: 'It's a stag. Don't you hear him breaking the branches with his antlers?
We were afraid of him, and he is afraid of us.'
They went on. The Great Bear was already setting. It was near morning,
and they did not know whether they were going the right way or not. Zhílin
thought it was the way he had been brought by the Tartars, and that they were
still some seven miles from the Russian fort; but he had nothing certain to go by,
and at night one easily mistakes the way. After a time they came to a clearing.
Kostílin sat down and said: 'Do as you like, I can go no farther! My feet won't
carry me.'
Zhílin tried to persuade him.
'No I shall never get there, I can't!'
Zhílin grew angry, and spoke roughly to him.
23

'Well, then, I shall go on alone. Good-bye!'
Kostílin jumped up and followed. They went another three miles. The mist
in the wood had settled down still more densely; they could not see a yard before
them, and the stars had grown dim.
Suddenly they heard the sound of a horse's hoofs in front of them. They
heard its shoes strike the stones. Zhílin lay down flat, and listened with his ear to
the ground.
'Yes, so it is! A horseman is coming towards us.'
They ran off the path, crouched among the bushes and waited. Zhílin
crept to the road, looked, and saw a Tartar on horseback driving a cow and
humming to himself. The Tartar rode past. Zhílin returned to Kostílin.
'God has led him past us; get up and let's go on!'
Kostílin tried to rise, but fell back again.
'I can't; on my word I can't! I have no strength left.'
He was heavy and stout, and had been perspiring freely. Chilled by the
mist, and with his feet all bleeding, he had grown quite limp.
Zhílin tried to lift him, when suddenly Kostílin screamed out: 'Oh, how it
hurts!'
Zhílin's heart sank.
'What are you shouting for? The Tartar is still near; he'll have heard you!'
And he thought to himself, 'He is really quite done up. What am I to do with
him? It won't do to desert a comrade.'
'Well, then, get up, and climb up on my back. I'll carry you if you really
can't walk.'
He helped Kostílin up, and put his arms under his thighs. Then he went
out on to the path, carrying him.
'Only, for the love of heaven,' said Zhílin, 'don't throttle me with your
hands! Hold on to my shoulders.'
Zhílin found his load heavy; his feet, too, were bleeding, and he was tired
out. Now and then he stooped to balance Kostílin better, jerking him up so that
he should sit higher, and then went on again.
The Tartar must, however, really have heard Kostílin scream. Zhílin
suddenly heard some one galloping behind and shouting in the Tartar tongue.
He darted in among the bushes. The Tartar seized his gun and fired, but did not
hit them, shouted in his own language, and galloped off along the road.
'Well, now we are lost, friend!' said Zhílin. 'That dog will gather the
Tartars together to hunt us down. Unless we can get a couple of miles away from
here we are lost!' And he thought to himself, 'Why the devil did I saddle myself
with this block? I should have got away long ago had I been alone.'
'Go on alone,' said Kostílin. 'Why should you perish because of me?'
'No I won't go. It won't do to desert a comrade.'
Again he took Kostílin on his shoulders and staggered on. They went on
in that way for another half-mile or more. They were still in the forest, and could
not see the end of it. But the mist was already dispersing, and clouds seemed to
be gathering, the stars were no longer to be seen. Zhílin was quite done up. They
came to a spring walled in with stones by the side of the path. Zhílin stopped and
set Kostílin down.
24

'Let me have a rest and a drink,' said he, 'and let us eat some of the cheese.
It can't be much farther now.'
But hardly had he lain down to get a drink, when he heard the sound of
horses' feet behind him. Again they darted to the right among the bushes, and
lay down under a steep slope.
They heard Tartar voices. The Tartars stopped at the very spot where they
had turned off the path. The Tartars talked a bit, and then seemed to be setting a
dog on the scent. There was a sound of crackling twigs, and a strange dog
appeared from behind the bushes. It stopped, and began to bark.
Then the Tartars, also strangers, came climbing down, seized Zhílin and
Kostílin, bound them, put them on horses, and rode away with them.
When they had ridden about two miles, they met Abdul, their owner, with
two other Tartars following him. After talking with the strangers, he put Zhílin
and Kostílin on two of his own horses and took them back to the Aoul.
Abdul did not laugh now, and did not say a word to them.
They were back at the Aoul by daybreak, and were set down in the street.
The children came crowding round, throwing stones, shrieking, and beating
them with whips.
The Tartars gathered together in a circle, and the old man from the foot of
the hill was also there. They began discussing, and Zhílin heard them
considering what should be done with him and Kostílin. Some said they ought to
be sent farther into the mountains; but the old man said: 'They must be killed!'
Abdul disputed with him, saying: 'I gave money for them, and I must get
ransom for them.' But the old man said: 'They will pay you nothing, but will only
bring misfortune. It is a sin to feed Russians. Kill them, and have done with it!'
They dispersed. When they had gone, the master came up to Zhílin and
said: 'If the money for your ransom is not sent within a fortnight, I will flog you;
and if you try to run away again, I'll kill you like a dog! Write a letter, and write
properly!'
Paper was brought to them, and they wrote the letters. Shackles were put
on their feet, and they were taken behind the Mosque to a deep pit about twelve
feet square, into which they were let down.
VI
Life was now very hard for them. Their shackles were never taken off, and
they were not let out into the fresh air. Unbaked dough was thrown to them as if
they were dogs, and water was let down in a can.
It was wet and close in the pit, and there was a horrible stench. Kostílin
grew quite ill, his body became swollen and he ached all over, and moaned or
slept all the time. Zhílin, too, grew downcast; he saw it was a bad look-out, and
could think of no way of escape.
He tried to make a tunnel, but there was nowhere to put the earth. His
master noticed it, and threatened to kill him.
He was sitting on the floor of the pit one day, thinking of freedom and
feeling very downhearted, when suddenly a cake fell into his lap, then another,
25

and then a shower of cherries. He looked up, and there was Dina. She looked at
him, laughed, and ran away. And Zhílin thought: 'Might not Dina help me?'
He cleared out a little place in the pit, scraped up some clay, and began
modelling toys. He made men, horses, and dogs, thinking, 'When Dina comes I'll
throw them up to her.'
But Dina did not come next day. Zhílin heard the tramp of horses; some
men rode past, and the Tartars gathered in council near the Mosque. They
shouted and argued; the word 'Russians' was repeated several times. He could
hear the voice of the old man. Though he could not distinguish what was said, he
guessed that Russian troops were somewhere near, and that the Tartars, afraid
they might come into the Aoul, did not know what to do with their prisoners.
After talking awhile, they went away. Suddenly he heard a rustling
overhead, and saw Dina crouching at the edge of the pit, her knees higher than
her head, and bending over so that the coins of her plait dangled above the pit.
Her eyes gleamed like stars. She drew two cheeses out of her sleeve and threw
them to him. Zhílin took them and said, 'Why did you not come before? I have
made some toys for you. Here, catch!' And he began throwing the toys up, one
by one.
But she shook her head and would not look at them.
'I don't want any,' she said. She sat silent for awhile, and then went on,
'Iván, they want to kill you!' And she pointed to her own throat.
'Who wants to kill me?'
'Father; the old men say he must. But I am sorry for you!'
Zhílin answered: 'Well, if you are sorry for me, bring me a long pole.'
She shook her head, as much as to say, 'I can't!'
He clasped his hands and prayed her: 'Dina, please do! Dear Dina, I beg of
you!'
'I can't!' she said, 'they would see me bringing it. They're all at home.' And
she went away.
So when evening came Zhílin still sat looking up now and then, and
wondering what would happen. The stars were there, but the moon had not yet
risen. The Mullah's voice was heard; then all was silent. Zhílin was beginning to
doze, thinking: 'The girl will be afraid to do it!'
Suddenly he felt clay falling on his head. He looked up, and saw a long
pole poking into the opposite wall of the pit. It kept poking about for a time, and
then it came down, sliding into the pit. Zhílin was glad indeed. He took hold of it
and lowered it. It was a strong pole, one that he had seen before on the roof of his
master's hut.
He looked up. The stars were shining high in the sky, and just above the
pit Dina's eyes gleamed in the dark like a cat's. She stooped with her face close to
the edge of the pit, and whispered, 'Iván! Iván!' waving her hand in front of her
face to show that he should speak low.
'What?' said Zhílin.
'All but two have gone away.'
Then Zhílin said, 'Well, Kostílin, come; let us have one last try; I'll help
you up.'
But Kostílin would not hear of it.
26

'No,' said he, 'It's clear I can't get away from here. How can I go, when I
have hardly strength to turn round?'
'Well, good-bye, then! Don't think ill of me!' and they kissed each other.
Zhílin seized the pole, told Dina to hold on, and began to climb. He slipped once
or twice; the shackles hindered him. Kostílin helped him, and he managed to get
to the top. Dina with her little hands, pulled with all her might at his shirt,
laughing.
Zhílin drew out the pole and said, 'Put it back in its place, Dina, or they'll
notice, and you will be beaten.'
She dragged the pole away, and Zhílin went down the hill. When he had
gone down the steep incline, he took a sharp stone and tried to wrench the lock
off the shackles. But it was a strong lock and he could not manage to break it, and
besides, it was difficult to get at. Then he heard some one running down the hill,
springing lightly. He thought: 'Surely, that's Dina again.'
Dina came, took a stone and said, 'Let me try.'
She knelt down and tried to wrench the lock off, but her little hands were
as slender as little twigs, and she had not the strength. She threw the stone away
and began to cry. Then Zhílin set to work again at the lock, and Dina squatted
beside him with her hand on his shoulder.
Zhílin looked round and saw a red light to the left behind the hill. The
moon was just rising. 'Ah!' he thought, 'before the moon has risen I must have
passed the valley and be in the forest.' So he rose and threw away the stone.
Shackles or no, he must go on.
'Good-bye, Dina dear!' he said. 'I shall never forget you!'
Dina seized hold of him and felt about with her hands for a place to put
some cheeses she had brought. He took them from her.
'Thank you, my little one. Who will make dolls for you when I am gone?'
And he stroked her head.
Dina burst into tears hiding her face in her hands. Then she ran up the hill
like a young goat, the coins in her plait clinking against her back.
Zhílin crossed himself took the lock of his shackles in his hand to prevent
its clattering, and went along the road, dragging his shackled leg, and looking
towards the place where the moon was about to rise. He now knew the way. If he
went straight he would have to walk nearly six miles. If only he could reach the
wood before the moon had quite risen! He crossed the river; the light behind the
hill was growing whiter. Still looking at it, he went along the valley. The moon
was not yet visible. The light became brighter, and one side of the valley was
growing lighter and lighter, and shadows were drawing in towards the foot of
the hill, creeping nearer and nearer to him.
Zhílin went on, keeping in the shade. He was hurrying, but the moon was
moving still faster; the tops of the hills on the right were already lit up. As he got
near the wood the white moon appeared from behind the hills, and it became
light as day. One could see all the leaves on the trees. It was light on the hill, but
silent, as if nothing were alive; no sound could be heard but the gurgling of the
river below.
Zhílin reached the wood without meeting any one, chose a dark spot, and
sat down to rest.
27

He rested and ate one of the cheeses. Then he found a stone and set to
work again to knock off the shackles. He knocked his hands sore, but could not
break the lock. He rose and went along the road. After walking the greater part
of a mile he was quite done up, and his feet were aching. He had to stop every
ten steps. 'There is nothing else for it,' thought he. 'I must drag on as long as I
have any strength left. If I sit down, I shan't be able to rise again. I can't reach the
fortress; but when day breaks I'll lie down in the forest, remain there all day, and
go on again at night.'
He went on all night. Two Tartars on horseback passed him; but he heard
them a long way off, and hid behind a tree.
The moon began to grow paler, the dew to fall. It was getting near dawn,
and Zhílin had not reached the end of the forest. 'Well,' thought he, 'I'll walk
another thirty steps, and then turn in among the trees and sit down.'
He walked another thirty steps, and saw that he was at the end of the
forest. He went to the edge; it was now quite light, and straight before him was
the plain and the fortress. To the left, quite close at the foot of the slope, a fire was
dying out, and the smoke from it spread round. There were men gathered about
the fire.
He looked intently, and saw guns glistening. They were soldiers -Cossacks!
Zhílin was filled with joy. He collected his remaining strength and set off
down the hill, saying to himself: 'God forbid that any mounted Tartar should see
me now, in the open field! Near as I am, I could not get there in time.'
Hardly had he said this when, a couple of hundred yards off, on a hillock
to the left, he saw three Tartars.
They saw him also and made a rush. His heart sank. He waved his hands,
and shouted with all his might, 'Brothers, brothers! Help!'
The Cossacks heard him, and a party of them on horseback darted to cut
across the Tartars' path. The Cossacks were far and the Tartars were near; but
Zhílin, too, made a last effort. Lifting the shackles with his hand, he ran towards
the Cossacks, hardly knowing what he was doing, crossing himself and shouting,
'Brothers! Brothers! Brothers!'
There were some fifteen Cossacks. The Tartars were frightened, and
stopped before reaching him. Zhilin staggered up to the Cossacks.
They surrounded him and began questioning him. 'Who are you? What
are you? Where from?
But Zhílin was quite beside himself, and could only weep and repeat,
'Brothers! Brothers!'
Then the soldiers came running up and crowded round Zhílin -- one
giving him bread, another buckwheat, a third vódka: one wrapping a cloak
round him, another breaking his shackles.
The officers recognized him, and rode with him to the fortress. The
soldiers were glad to see him back, and his comrades all gathered round him.
Zhílin told them all that had happened to him.
'That's the way I went home and got married!' said he. 'No. It seems plain
that fate was against it!'
28

So he went on serving in the Caucasus. A month passed before Kostílin
was released, after paying five thousand roubles ransom. He was almost dead
when they brought him back.
(Written in 1870.)

29

3

THE BEAR-HUNT
[The adventure here narrated is one that happened to Tolstoy himself in 1858.
More than twenty years later he gave up hunting, on humanitarian grounds.]
WE were out on a bear-hunting expedition. My comrade had shot at a bear, but
only gave him a flesh-wound. There were traces of blood on the snow, but the
bear had got away.
We all collected in a group in the forest, to decide whether we ought to go
after the bear at once, or wait two or three days till he should settle down again.
We asked the peasant bear-drivers whether it would be possible to get round the
bear that day.
'No. It's impossible,' said an old bear-driver. 'You must let the bear quiet
down. In five days' time it will be possible to surround him; but if you followed
him now, you would only frighten him away, and he would not settle down.'
But a young bear-driver began disputing with the old man, saying that it
was quite possible to get round the bear now.
'On such snow as this,' said he, 'he won't go far, for he is a fat bear. He will
settle down before evening; or, if not, I can overtake him on snowshoes.'
The comrade I was with was against following up the bear, and advised
waiting. But I said:
'We need not argue. You do as you like, but I will follow up the track with
Damian. If we get round the bear, all right. If not, we lose nothing. It is still early,
and there is nothing else for us to do to-day.'
So it was arranged.
The others went back to the sledges, and returned to the village. Damian
and I took some bread, and remained behind in the forest.
When they had all left us, Damian and I examined our guns, and after
tucking the skirts of our warm coats into our belts, we started off, following the
bear's tracks.
The weather was fine, frosty and calm; but it was hard work snowshoeing. The snow was deep and soft: it had not caked together at all in the
forest, and fresh snow had fallen the day before, so that our snow-shoes sank six
inches deep in the snow, and sometimes more.
The bear's tracks were visible from a distance, and we could see how he
had been going; sometimes sinking in up to his belly and ploughing up the snow
as he went. At first, while under large trees, we kept in sight of his track; but
when it turned into a thicket of small firs, Damian stopped.
'We must leave the trail now,' said he. 'He has probably settled somewhere
here. You can see by the snow that he has been squatting down. Let us leave the
track and go round; but we must go quietly. Don't shout or cough, or we shall
frighten him away.'
Leaving the track, therefore, we turned off to the left. But when we had
gone about five hundred yards, there were the bear's traces again right before us.
We followed them, and they brought us out on to the road. There we stopped,
30

examining the road to see which way the bear had gone. Here and there in the
snow were prints of the bear's paw, claws and all, and here and there the marks
of a peasant's bark shoes. The bear had evidently gone towards the village.
As we followed the road, Damian said:
'It's no use watching the road now. We shall see where he has turned off,
to right or left, by the marks in the soft snow at the side. He must have turned off
somewhere; for he won't have gone on to the village.'
We went along the road for nearly a mile, and then saw, ahead of us, the
bear's track turning off the road. We examined it. How strange! It was a bear's
track right enough, only not going from the road into the forest, but from the
forest on to the road! The toes were pointing towards the road.
'This must be another bear,' I said.
Damian looked at it, and considered a while.
'No,' said he. 'It's the same one. He's been playing tricks, and walked
backwards when he left the road.'
We followed the track, and found it really was so! The bear had gone
some ten steps backwards, and then, behind a fir tree, had turned round and
gone straight ahead. Damian stopped and said:
'Now, we are sure to get round him. There is a marsh ahead of us, and he
must have settled down there. Let us go round it.'
We began to make our way round, through a fir thicket. I was tired out by
this time, and it had become still more difficult to get along. Now I glided on to
juniper bushes and caught my snow-shoes in them, now a tiny fir tree appeared
between my feet, or, from want of practise, my snow-shoes slipped off; and now
I came upon a stump or a log hidden by the snow. I was getting very tired, and
was drenched with perspiration; and I took off my fur cloak. And there was
Damian all the time, gliding along as if in a boat, his snowshoes moving as if of
their own accord, never catching against anything, nor slipping off. He even took
my fur and slung it over his shoulder, and still kept urging me on.
We went on for two more miles, and came out on the other side of the
marsh. I was lagging behind. My snow-shoes kept slipping off, and my feet
stumbled. Suddenly Damian, who was ahead of me, stopped and waved his arm.
When I came up to him, he bent down, pointing with his hand, and whispered:
'Do you see the magpie chattering above that undergrowth? It scents the
bear from afar. That is where he must be.'
We turned off and went on for more than another half-mile, and presently
we came on to the old track again. We had, therefore, been right round the bear
who was now within the track we had left. We stopped, and I took off my cap
and loosened all my clothes. I was as hot as in a steam bath, and as wet as a
drowned rat. Damian too was flushed, and wiped his face with his sleeve.
'Well, sir,' he said, 'we have done our job, and now we must have a rest.'
The evening glow already showed red through the forest. We took off our
snow-shoes and sat down on them, and got some bread and salt out of our bags.
First I ate some snow, and then some bread; and the bread tasted so good, that I
thought I had never in my life had any like it before. We sat there resting until it
began to grow dusk, and then I asked Damian if it was far to the village.
31

'Yes,' he said. 'It must be about eight miles. We will go on there to-night,
but now we must rest. Put on your fur coat, sir, or you'll be catching cold.'
Damian flattened down the snow, and breaking off some fir branches
made a bed of them. We lay down side by side, resting our heads on our arms. I
do not remember how I fell asleep. Two hours later I woke up, hearing
something crack.
I had slept so soundly that I did not know where I was. I looked around
me. How wonderful! I was in some sort of a hall, all glittering and white with
gleaming pillars, and when I looked up I saw, through delicate white tracery, a
vault, raven black and studded with coloured lights. After a good look, I
remembered that we were in the forest, and that what I took for a hall and pillars,
were trees covered with snow and hoar-frost, and the coloured lights were stars
twinkling between the branches.
Hoar-frost had settled in the night; all the twigs were thick with it,
Damian was covered with it, it was on my fur coat, and it dropped down from
the trees. I woke Damian, and we put on our snowshoes and started. It was very
quiet in the forest. No sound was heard but that of our snow-shoes pushing
through the soft snow; except when now and then a tree, cracked by the frost,
made the forest resound. Only once we heard the sound of a living creature.
Something rustled close to us, and then rushed away. I felt sure it was the bear,
but when we went to the spot whence the sound had come, we found the
footmarks of hares, and saw several young aspen trees with their bark gnawed.
We had startled some hares while they were feeding.
We came out on the road, and followed it, dragging our snow-shoes
behind us. It was easy walking now. Our snow-shoes clattered as they slid
behind us from side to side of the hard-trodden road. The snow creaked under
our boots, and the cold hoar-frost settled on our faces like down. Seen through
the branches, the stars seemed to be running to meet us, now twinkling, now
vanishing, as if the whole sky were on the move.
I found my comrade sleeping, but woke him up, and related how we had
got round the bear. After telling our peasant host to collect beaters for the
morning, we had supper and lay down to sleep.
I was so tired that I could have slept on till midday, if my comrade had
not roused me. I jumped up, and saw that he was already dressed, and busy
doing something to his gun.
'Where is Damian?' said I.
'In the forest, long ago. He has already been over the tracks you made, and
been back here, and now he has gone to look after the beaters.'
I washed and dressed, and loaded my guns; and then we got into a sledge,
and started.
The sharp frost still continued. It was quiet, and the sun could not be seen.
There was a thick mist above us, and hoar-frost still covered everything.
After driving about two miles along the road, as we came near the forest,
we saw a cloud of smoke rising from a hollow, and presently reached a group of
peasants, both men and women, armed with cudgels.
We got out and went up to them. The men sat roasting potatoes, and
laughing and talking with the women.
32

Damian was there too; and when we arrived the people got up, and
Damian led them away to place them in the circle we had made the day before.
They went along in single file, men and women, thirty in all. The snow was so
deep that we could only see them from their waists upwards. They turned into
the forest, and my friend and I followed in their track.
Though they had trodden a path, walking was difficult, but, on the other
hand, it was impossible to fall: it was like walking between two walls of snow.
We went on in this way for nearly half a mile, when all at once we saw
Damian coming from another direction -- running towards us on his snowshoes,
and beckoning us to join him. We went towards him, and he showed us where to
stand. I took my place, and looked round me.
To my left were tall fir trees, between the trunks of which I could see a
good way, and, like a black patch just visible behind the trees, I could see a
beater. In front of me was a thicket of young firs, about as high as a man, their
branches weighed down and stuck together with snow. Through this copse ran a
path thickly covered with snow, and leading straight up to where I stood. The
thicket stretched away to the right of me, and ended in a small glade, where I
could see Damian placing my comrade.
I examined both my guns, and considered where I had better stand. Three
steps behind me was a tall fir.
'That's where I'll stand,' thought I, 'and then I can lean my second gun
against the tree'; and I moved towards the tree, sinking up to my knees in the
snow at each step. I trod the snow down, and made a clearance about a yard
square, to stand on. One gun I kept in my hand; the other, ready cocked, I placed
leaning up against the tree. Then I unsheathed and replaced my dagger, to make
sure that I could draw it easily in case of need.
Just as I had finished these preparations, I heard Damian shouting in the
forest:
'He's up! He's up!'
And as soon as Damian shouted, the peasants round the circle all replied
in their different voices.
'Up, up, up! Ou! Ou! Ou!' shouted the men.
'Ay! Ay! Ay!' screamed the women in high. pitched tones.
The bear was inside the circle, and as Damian drove him on, the people all
round kept shouting. Only my friend and I stood silent and motionless, waiting
for the bear to come towards us. As I stood gazing and listening, my heart beat
violently. I trembled, holding my gun fast.
'Now now,' I thought. 'He will come suddenly. I shall aim, fire, and he will
drop -- '
Suddenly, to my left, but at a distance, I heard something falling on the
snow. I looked between the tall fir trees, and, some fifty paces off, behind the
trunks, saw something big and black. I took aim and waited, thinking:
'Won't he come any nearer?'
As I waited I saw him move his ears, turn, and go back; and then I caught
a glimpse of the whole of him in profile. He was an immense brute. In my
excitement, I fired, and heard my bullet go 'flop' against a tree. Peering through
33

the smoke, I saw my bear scampering back into the circle, and disappearing
among the trees.
'Well,' thought I. 'My chance is lost. He won't come back to me. Either my
comrade will shoot him, or he will escape through the line of beaters. In any case
he won't give me another chance.'
I reloaded my gun, however, and again stood listening. The peasants were
shouting all round, but to the right, not far from where my comrade stood, I
heard a woman screaming in a frenzied voice: 'Here he is! Here he is! Come here,
come here! Oh! Oh! Ay! Ay!'
Evidently she could see the bear. I had given up expecting him, and was
looking to the right at my comrade. All at once I saw Damian with a stick in his
hand, and without his snow-shoes, running along a footpath towards my friend.
He crouched down beside him, pointing his stick as if aiming at something, and
then I saw my friend raise his gun and aim in the same direction. Crack! He fired.
'There,' thought I. 'He has killed him.'
But I saw that my comrade did not run towards the bear. Evidently he had
missed him, or the shot had not taken full effect.
'The bear will get away,' I thought. 'He will go back, but he won't come a
second time towards me. -- But what is that?'
Something was coming towards me like a whirlwind, snorting as it came;
and I saw the snow flying up quite near me. I glanced straight before me, and
there was the bear, rushing along the path through the thicket right at me,
evidently beside himself with fear. He was hardly half a dozen paces off, and I
could see the whole of him -- his black chest and enormous head with a reddish
patch. There he was, blundering straight at me, and scattering the snow about as
he came. I could see by his eyes that he did not see me, but, mad with fear, was
rushing blindly along; and his path led him straight at the tree under which I was
standing. I raised my gun and fired. He was almost upon me now, and I saw that
I had missed. My bullet had gone past him, and he did not even hear me fire, but
still came headlong towards me. I lowered my gun, and fired again, almost
touching his head. Crack! I had hit, but not killed him!
He raised his head, and laying his ears back, came at me, showing his
teeth.
I snatched at my other gun, but almost before I had touched it, he had
down at me and, knocking me over into the snow, had passed right over me.
'Thank goodness, he has left me,' thought I.
I tried to rise, but something pressed me down, and prevented my getting
up. The bear's rush had carried him past me, but he had turned back, and had
fallen on me with the whole weight of his body. I felt something heavy weighing
me down, and something warm above my face, and I realized that he was
drawing my whole face into his mouth. My nose was already in it, and I felt the
heat of it, and smelt his blood. He was pressing my shoulders down with his
paws so that I could not move: all I could do was to draw my head down
towards my chest away from his mouth, trying to free my nose and eyes, while
he tried to get his teeth into them. Then I felt that he had seized my forehead just
under the hair with the teeth of his lower jaw, and the flesh below my eyes with
his upper jaw, and was closing his teeth. It was as if my face were being cut with
34

knives. I struggled to get away, while he made haste to close his jaws like a dog
gnawing. I managed to twist my face away, but he began drawing it again into
his mouth.
'Now,' thought I, 'my end has come!'
Then I felt the weight lifted, and looking up, I saw that he was no longer
there. He had jumped off me and run away.
When my comrade and Damian had seen the bear knock me down and
begin worrying me, they rushed to the rescue. My comrade, in his haste,
blundered, and instead of following the trodden path, ran into the deep snow
and fell down. While he was struggling out of the snow, the bear was gnawing at
me. But Damian just as he was, without a gun, and with only a stick in his hand,
rushed along the path shouting:
'He's eating the master! He's eating the master!'
And as he ran, he called to the bear:
'Oh you idiot! What are you doing? Leave off! Leave off!'
The bear obeyed him, and leaving me ran away. When I rose, there was as
much blood on the snow as if a sheep had been killed, and the flesh hung in rags
above my eyes, though in my excitement I felt no pain.
My comrade had come up by this time, and the other people collected
round: they looked at my wound, and put snow on it. But I, forgetting about my
wounds, only asked:
'Where's the bear? Which way has he gone?'
Suddenly I heard:
'Here he is! Here he is!'
And we saw the bear again running at us. We seized our guns, but before
any one had time to fire he had run past. He had grown ferocious, and wanted to
gnaw me again, but seeing so many people he took fright. We saw by his track
that his head was bleeding and we wanted to follow him up; but, as my wounds
had become very painful, we went, instead, to the town to find a doctor.
The doctor stitched up my wounds with silk, and they soon began to heal.
A month later we went to hunt that bear again, but I did not get a chance
of finishing him. He would not come out of the circle, but went round and round
growling in a terrible voice.
Damian killed him. The bear's lower jaw had been broken, and one of his
teeth knocked out by my bullet.
He was a huge creature, and had splendid black fur.
I had him stuffed, and he now lies in my room. The wounds on my
forehead healed up so that the scars can scarcely be seen.
(Written about 1872.)

35

PART II
POPULAR STORIES
4

WHAT MEN LIVE BY
'We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the
brethren. He that loveth not abideth in death.' -- I Epistle St. John iii. 14.
'Whoso hath the world's goods, and beholdeth his brother in need, and
shutteth up his compassion from him, how doth the love of God abide in him?
My little children, let us not love in word, neither with the tongue; but in deed
and truth.' -- iii. 17-18.
'Love is of God; and every one that loveth is begotten of God, and
knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love.' -- iv. 7-8.
'No man hath beheld God at any time; if we love one another, God abideth
in us.' -- iv. 12.
'God is love; and he that abideth in love abideth in God, and God abideth
in him.' -- iv. 16.
'If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar; for he that
loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath
not seen?' -- iv. 20.
I
A SHOEMAKER named Simon, who had neither house nor land of his own,
lived with his wife and children in a peasant's hut, and earned his living by his
work. Work was cheap but bread was dear, and what he earned he spent for
food. The man and his wife had but one sheepskin coat between them for winter
wear, and even that was worn to tatters, and this was the second year he had
been wanting to buy sheep-skins for a new coat. Before winter Simon saved up a
little money: a three-rouble note lay hidden in his wife's box, and five roubles
and twenty kopeks6 were owed him by customers in the village.
So one morning he prepared to go to the village to buy the sheep-skins. He
put on over his shirt his wife's wadded nankeen jacket, and over that he put his
own cloth coat. He took the three-rouble note in his pocket, cut himself a stick to
serve as a staff, and started off after breakfast. 'I'll collect the five roubles that are
due to me,' thought he, 'add the three I have got, and that will be enough to buy
sheep-skins for the winter coat.'
He came to the village and called at a peasant's hut, but the man was not
at home. The peasant's wife promised that the money should be paid next week,
but she would not pay it herself. Then Simon called on another peasant, but this
6 One hundred kopeks make a rouble. The kopek is worth about a farthing.

36

one swore he had no money, and would only pay twenty kopeks which he owed
for a pair of boots Simon had mended. Simon then tried to buy the sheep-skins
on credit, but the deader would not trust him.
'Bring your money,' said he, 'then you may have your pick of the skins.
We know what debt-collecting is like.'
So all the business the shoemaker did was to get the twenty kopeks for
boots he had mended, and to take a pair of felt boots a peasant gave him to sole
with leather.
Simon felt downhearted. He spent the twenty kopeks on vódka, and
started homewards without having bought any skins. In the morning he had felt
the frost; but now, after drinking the vódka, he felt warm even without a sheepskin coat. He trudged along, striking his stick on the frozen earth with one hand,
swinging the felt boots with the other, and talking to himself.
'I'm quite warm,' said he, 'though I have no sheepskin coat. I've had a
drop, and it runs through all my veins. I need no sheepskins. I go along and don't
worry about anything. That's the sort of man I am! What do I care? I can live
without sheep skins. I don't need them. My wife will fret, to be sure. And, true
enough, it's a shame; one works all day long, and then does not get paid. Stop a
bit! If you don't bring that money along, sure enough I'll skin you, blessed if I
don't. How's that? He pays twenty kopeks at a time! What can I do with twenty
kopeks: Drink it -- that's all one can do! Hard up, he says he is! So he may be -but what about me? You have house, and cattle, and everything; I've only what I
stand up in! You have corn of your own growing; I have to buy every grain. Do
what I will, I must spend three roubles every week for bread alone. I come home
and find the bread all used up, and I have to fork out another rouble and a half.
So just you pay up what you owe, and no nonsense about it!'
By this time he had nearly reached the shrine at the bend of the road.
Looking up, he saw something whitish behind the shrine. The daylight was
fading, and the shoemaker peered at the thing without being able to make out
what it was. 'There was no white stone here before. Can it be an ox? It's not like
an ox. It has a head like a man, but it's too white; and what could a man be doing
there?'
He came closer, so that it was clearly visible. To his surprise it really was a
man, alive or dead, sitting naked, leaning motionless against the shrine. Terror
seized the shoemaker, and he thought, 'Some one has killed him, stripped him,
and left him here. If I meddle I shall surely get into trouble.'
So the shoemaker went on. He passed in front of the shrine so that he
could not see the man. When he had gone some way, he looked back, and saw
that the man was no longer leaning against the shrine, but was moving as if
looking towards him. The shoemaker felt more frightened than before, and
thought, 'Shall I go back to him, or shall I go on? If I go near him something
dreadful may happen. Who knows who the fellow is? He has not come here for
any good. If I go near him he may jump up and throttle me, and there will be no
getting away. Or if not, he'd still be a burden on one's hands. What could I do
with a naked man? I couldn't give him my last clothes. Heaven only help me to
get away!'
37

So the shoemaker hurried on, leaving the shrine behind him -- when
suddenly his conscience smote him and he stopped in the road.
'What are you doing, Simon?' said he to himself. 'The man may be dying
of want, and you slip past afraid. Have you grown so rich as to be afraid of
robbers? Ah, Simon, shame on you!'
So he turned back and went up to the man.
II
Simon approached the stranger, looked at him, and saw that he was a
young man, fit, with no bruises on his body, only evidently freezing and
frightened, and he sat there leaning back without looking up at Simon, as if too
faint to lift his eyes. Simon went close to him, and then the man seemed to wake
up. Turning his head, he opened his eyes and looked into Simon's face. That one
look was enough to make Simon fond of the man. He threw the felt boots on the
ground undid his sash, laid it on the boots, and took off his cloth coat.
'It's not a time for talking,' said he. 'Come, put this coat on at once!' And
Simon took the man by the elbows and helped him to rise. As he stood there,
Simon saw that his body was clean and in good condition, his hands and feet
shapely, and his face good and kind. He threw his coat over the man's shoulders
but the latter could not find the sleeves. Simon guided his arms into them, and
drawing the coat well on trapped it closely about him, tying the sash round the
man's waist.
Simon even took off his torn cap to put it on the man's head, but then his
own head felt cold, and he thought: 'I'm quite bald, while he has long curly hair.'
So he put his cap on his own head again. 'It will be better to give him something
for his feet,' thought he; and he made the man sit down, and helped him to put
on the felt boots, saying, 'There, friend, now move about and warm yourself.
Other matters can be settled later on. Can you walk?'
The man stood up and looked kindly at Simon, but could not say a word.
'Why don't you speak?' said Simon. 'It's too cold to stay here; we must be
getting home. There now, take my stick, and if you're feeling weak, lean on that.
Now step out!'
The man started walking, and moved easily, not lagging behind.
As they went along, Simon asked him, 'And where do you belong to?'
'I'm not from these parts.'
'I thought as much. I know the folks hereabouts. But how did you come to
be there by the shrine?'
'I cannot tell.'
'Has some one been ill-treating you?'
'No one has ill-treated me. God has punished me.
'Of course God rules all. Still, you'll have to find food and shelter
somewhere. Where do you want to go to?'
'It is all the same to me.'
Simon was amazed. The man did not look like a rogue, and he spoke
gently, but yet he gave no account of himself. Still Simon thought, 'Who knows
38

what may have happened?' And he said to the stranger: 'Well then, come home
with me, and at least warm yourself awhile.'
So Simon walked towards his home, and the stranger kept up with him,
walking at his side. The wind had risen and Simon felt it cold under his shirt. He
was getting over his tipsiness by now, and began to feel the frost. He went along
sniffling and wrapping his wife's coat round him, and he thought to himself:
'There now -- talk about sheepskins! I went out for sheepskins and come home
without even a coat to my back and what is more, I'm bringing a naked man
along with me. Matryóna won't be pleased!' And when he thought of his wife he
felt sad; but when he looked at the stranger and remembered how he had looked
up at him at the shrine, his heart was glad.
III
Simon's wife had everything ready early that day. She had cut wood,
brought water, fed the children eaten her own meal, and now she sat thinking.
She wondered when she ought to make bread: now or to-morrow? There was
still a large piece left.
'If Simon has had some dinner in town,' thought she, and does not eat
much for supper, the bread will last out another day.'
She weighed the piece of bread in her hand again and again, and thought:
'I won't make any more to-day. We have only enough flour left to bake one batch.
We can manage to make this last out till Friday.'
So Matryóna put away the bread, and sat down at the table to patch her
husband's shirt. While she worked she thought how her husband was buying
skins for a winter coat.
'If only the dealer does not cheat him. My good man is much too simple;
he cheats nobody, but any child can take him in. Eight roubles is a lot of money
-- he should get a good coat at that price. Not tanned skins, but still a proper
winter coat. How difficult it was last winter to get on without a warm coat. I
could neither get down to the river, nor go out anywhere. When he went out he
put on all we had, and there was nothing left for me. He did not start very early
to-day, but still it's time he was back. I only hope he has not gone on the spree!'
Hardly had Matryóna thought this, when steps were heard on the
threshold, and some one entered. Matryóna stuck her needle into her work and
went out into the passage. There she saw two men: Simon, and with him a man
without a hat, and wearing felt boots.
Matryóna noticed at once that her husband smelt of spirits. 'There now, he
has been drinking,' thought she. And when she saw that he was coatless, had
only her jacket on, brought no parcel, stood there silent, and seemed ashamed,
her heart was ready to break with disappointment. 'He has drunk the money,'
thought she, 'and has been on the spree with some good-for-nothing fellow
whom he has brought home with him.'
Matryóna let them pass into the hut, followed them in, and saw that the
stranger was a young, slight man, wearing her husband's coat. There was no shirt
to be seen under it, and he had no hat. Having entered, he stood neither moving,
nor raising his eyes, and Matryóna thought: 'He must be a bad man -- he's afraid.'
39

Matryóna frowned, and stood beside the oven looking to see what they
would do.
Simon took off his cap and sat down on the bench as if things were all
right.
'Come, Matryóna; if supper is ready, let us have some.'
Matryóna muttered something to herself and did not move, but stayed
where she was, by the oven. She looked first at the one and then at the other of
them, and only shook her head. Simon saw that his wife was annoyed, but tried
to pass it off. Pretending not to notice anything, he took the stranger by the arm.
'Sit down, friend,' said he, 'and let us have some supper.'
The stranger sat down on the bench.
'Haven't you cooked anything for us?' said Simon.
Matryóna's anger boiled over. 'I've cooked, but not for you. It seems to me
you have drunk your wits away. You went to buy a sheep-skin coat, but come
home without so much as the coat you had on, and bring a naked vagabond
home with you. I have no supper for drunkards like you.'
'That's enough, Matryóna. Don't wag your tongue without reason! You
had better ask what sort of man --'
'And you tell me what you've done with the money?'
Simon found the pocket of the jacket, drew out the three-rouble note, and
unfolded it.
'Here is the money. Trífonof did not pay, but promises to pay soon.'
Matryóna got still more angry; he had bought no sheep-skins, but had put
his only coat on some naked fellow and had even brought him to their house.
She snatched up the note from the table, took it to put away in safety, and
said: 'I have no supper for you. We can't feed all the naked drunkards in the
world.'
'There now, Matryóna, hold your tongue a bit. First hear what a man has
to say!'
'Much wisdom I shall hear from a drunken fool. I was right in not wanting
to marry you -- a drunkard. The linen my mother gave me you drank; and now
you've been to buy a coat -- and have drunk it too!'
Simon tried to explain to his wife that he had only spent twenty kopeks;
tried to tell how he had found the man -- but Matryóna would not let him get a
word in. She talked nineteen to the dozen, and dragged in things that had
happened ten years before.
Matryóna talked and talked, and at last she flew at Simon and seized him
by the sleeve.
'Give me my jacket. It is the only one I have and you must needs take it
from me and wear it yourself. Give it here, you mangy dog, and may the devil
take you.'
Simon began to pull off the jacket, and turned a sleeve of it inside out;
Matryóna seized the jacket and it burst its seams. She snatched it up, threw it
over her head and went to the door. She meant to go out, but stopped undecided
-- she wanted to work off her anger, but she also wanted to learn what sort of a
man the stranger was.
40

IV
Matryóna stopped and said: 'If he were a good man he would not be
naked. Why, he hasn't even a shirt on him. If he were all right, you would say
where you came across the fellow.'
'That's just what I am trying to tell you,' said Simon. 'As I came to the
shrine I saw him sitting all naked and frozen. It isn't quite the weather to sit
about naked! God sent me to him, or he would have perished. What was I to do?
How do we know what may have happened to him? So I took him, clothed him,
and brought him along. Don't be so angry, Matryóna. It is a sin. Remember, we
all must die one day.'
Angry words rose to Matryóna's lips, but she looked at the stranger and
was silent. He sat on the edge of the bench, motionless, his hands folded on his
knees, his head drooping on his breast, his eyes closed, and his brows knit as if in
pain. Matryóna was silent, and Simon said: 'Matryóna, have you no love of God?'
Matryóna heard these words, and as she looked at the stranger, suddenly
her heart softened towards him. She came back from the door, and going to the
oven she got out the supper. Setting a cup on the table, she poured out some
kvas7. Then she brought out the last piece of bread, and set out a knife and
spoons.
'Eat, if you want to,' said she.
Simon drew the stranger to the table.
'Take your place, young man,' said he.
Simon cut the bread, crumbled it into the broth, and they began to eat.
Matryóna sat at the corner of the table, resting her head on her hand and looking
at the stranger.
And Matryóna was touched with pity for the stranger, and began to feel
fond of him. And at once the stranger's face lit up; his brows were no longer bent,
he raised his eyes and smiled at Matryóna.
When they had finished supper, the woman cleared away the things and
began questioning the stranger. 'Where are you from?' said she.
'I am not from these parts.'
'But how did you come to be on the road?'
'I may not tell.'
'Did some one rob you?'
'God punished me.'
'And you were lying there naked?'
'Yes, naked and freezing. Simon saw me and had pity on me. He took off
his coat, put it on me and brought me here. And you have fed me, given me
drink, and shown pity on me. God will reward you!'
Matryóna rose, took from the window Simon's old shirt she had been
patching, and gave it to the stranger. She also brought out a pair of trousers for
him.

7 A non-intoxicating drink usually made from rye-malt and rye-flour.

41

'There,' said she, 'I see you have no shirt. Put this on, and lie down where
you please, in the loft or on the oven8.'
The stranger took off the coat, put on the shirt, and lay down in the loft.
Matryóna put out the candle, took the coat, and climbed to where her husband
lay.
Matryóna drew the skirts of the coat over her and lay down, but could not
sleep; she could not get the stranger out of her mind.
When she remembered that he had eaten their last piece of bread and that
there was none for to-morrow and thought of the shirt and trousers she had
given away, she felt grieved; but when she remembered how he had smiled, her
heart was glad.
Long did Matryóna lie awake, and she noticed that Simon also was awake
-- he drew the coat towards him.
'Simon!'
'Well?'
'You have had the last of the bread, and I have not put any to rise. I don't
know what we shall do tomorrow. Perhaps I can borrow some of neighbour
Martha.'
'If we're alive we shall find something to eat.'
The woman lay still awhile, and then said, 'He seems a good man, but
why does he not tell us who he is?'
'I suppose he has his reasons.'
'Simon!'
'Well?'
'We give; but why does nobody give us anything?'
Simon did not know what to say; so he only said, 'Let us stop talking,' and
turned over and went to sleep.
V
In the morning Simon awoke. The children were still asleep; his wife had
gone to the neighbour's to borrow some bread. The stranger alone was sitting on
the bench, dressed in the old shirt and trousers, and looking upwards. His face
was brighter than it had been the day before.
Simon said to him, 'Well, friend; the belly wants bread and the naked
body clothes. One has to work for a living. What work do you know?'
'I do not know any.'
This surprised Simon, but he said, 'Men who want to learn can learn
anything.'
'Men work, and I will work also.'
'What is your name?'
'Michael.'
'Well Michael, if you don't wish to talk about yourself that is your own
affair; but you'll have to earn a living for yourself. If you will work as I tell you, I
will give you food and shelter.'
8 The brick oven in a Russian peasant's hut is usually built so as to leave a flat top, large enough to

lie on, for those who want to sleep in a warm place.

42

'May God reward you! I will learn. Show me what to do.'
Simon took yarn, put it round his thumb and began to twist it.
'It is easy enough -- see!'
Michael watched him, put some yarn round his own thumb in the same
way, caught the knack, and twisted the yarn also.
Then Simon showed him how to wax the thread. This also Michael
mastered. Next Simon showed him how to twist the bristle in, and how to sew,
and this, too, Michael learned at once.
Whatever Simon showed him he understood at once, and after three days
he worked as if he had sewn boots all his life. He worked without stopping, and
ate little. When work was over he sat silently, looking upwards. He hardly went
into the street, spoke only when necessary, and neither joked nor laughed. They
never saw him smile, except that first evening when Matryóna gave them
supper.
VI
Day by day and week by week the year went round. Michael lived and
worked with Simon. His fame spread till people said that no one sewed boots so
neatly and strongly as Simon's workman, Michael; and from all the district round
people came to Simon for their boots, and he began to be well off.
One winter day, as Simon and Michael sat working a carriage on sledgerunners, with three horses and with bells, drove up to the hut. They looked out of
the window; the carriage stopped at their door, a fine servant jumped down from
the box and opened the door. A gentleman in a fur coat got out and walked up to
Simon's hut. Up jumped Matryóna and opened the door wide. The gentleman
stooped to enter the hut, and when he drew himself up again his head nearly
reached the ceiling, and he seemed quite to fill his end of the room.
Simon rose, bowed, and looked at the gentleman with astonishment. He
had never seen any one like him. Simon himself was lean, Michael was thin, and
Matryóna was dry as a bone, but this man was like some one from another
world: red-faced, burly, with a neck like a bull's, and looking altogether as if he
were cast in iron.
The gentleman puffed, threw off his fur coat, sat down on the bench, and
said, 'Which of you is the master bootmaker?'
'I am, your Excellency,' said Simon, coming forward.
Then the gentleman shouted to his lad, 'Hey, Fédka, bring the leather!'
The servant ran in, bringing a parcel. The gentleman took the parcel and
put it on the table.
'Untie it' said he. The lad untied it.
The gentleman pointed to the leather.
'Look here, shoemaker,' said he, 'do you see this leather?'
'Yes, your honour.'
'But do you know what sort of leather it is?'
Simon felt the leather and said, 'It is good leather.'
'Good, indeed! Why, you fool, you never saw such leather before in your
life. It's German, and cost twenty roubles.'
43

Simon was frightened, and said, 'Where should I ever see leather like
that?'
'Just so! Now, can you make it into boots for me?'
'Yes, your Excellency, I can.'
Then the gentleman shouted at him: 'You can, can you? Well, remember
whom you are to make them for, and what the leather is. You must make me
boots that will wear for a year, neither losing shape nor coming unsewn. If you
can do it, take the leather and cut it up; but if you can't, say so. I warn you now, if
your boots come unsewn or lose shape within a year, I will have you put in
prison. If they don't burst or lose shape for a year, I will pay you ten roubles for
your work.'
Simon was frightened, and did not know what to say. He glanced at
Michael and nudging him with his elbow, whispered: 'Shall I take the work?'
Michael nodded his head as if to say, 'Yes, take it.'
Simon did as Michael advised, and undertook to make boots that would
not lose shape or split for a whole year.
Calling his servant, the gentleman told him to pull the boot off his left leg,
which he stretched out.
'Take my measure!' said he.
Simon stitched a paper measure seventeen inches long, smoothed it out,
knelt down, wiped his hands well on his apron so as not to soil the gentleman's
sock, and began to measure. He measured the sole, and round the instep, and
began to measure the calf of the leg, but the paper was too short. The calf of the
leg was as thick as a beam.
'Mind you don't make it too tight in the leg.'
Simon stitched on another strip of paper. The gentleman twitched his toes
about in his sock, looking round at those in the hut, and as he did so he noticed
Michael.
'Whom have you there?' asked he
'That is my workman. He will sew the boots.'
'Mind,' said the gentleman to Michael, 'remember to make them so that
they will last me a year.'
Simon also looked at Michael, and saw that Michael was not looking at the
gentleman, but was gazing into the corner behind the gentleman, as if he saw
some one there. Michael looked and looked, and suddenly he smiled, and his
face became brighter.
'What are you grinning at, you fool?' thundered the gentleman. 'You had
better look to it that the boots are ready in time.'
'They shall be ready in good time,' said Michael.
'Mind it is so,' said the gentleman, and he put on his boots and his fur coat,
wrapped the latter round him, and went to the door. But he forgot to stoop and
struck his head against the lintel.
He swore and rubbed his head. Then he took his seat in the carriage and
drove away.
When he had gone, Simon said: 'There's a figure of a man for you! You
could not kill him with a mallet. He almost knocked out the lintel, but little harm
it did him.'
44

And Matryóna said: 'Living as he does, how should he not grow strong?
Death itself can't touch such a rock as that.'
VII
Then Simon said to Michael: 'Well, we have taken the work, but we must
see we don't get into trouble over it. The leather is dear, and the gentleman hottempered. We must make no mistakes. Come, your eye is truer and your hands
have become nimbler than mine, so you take this measure and cut out the boots. I
will finish off the sewing of the vamps.'
Michael did as he was told. He took the leather spread it out on the table,
folded it in two, took a knife and began to cut out.
Matryóna came and watched him cutting, and was surprised to see how
he was doing it. Matryóna was accustomed to seeing boots made, and she looked
and saw that Michael was not cutting the leather for boots, but was cutting it
round.
She wished to say something, but she thought to herself: 'Perhaps I do not
understand how gentlemen's boots should be made. I suppose Michael knows
more about it -- and I won't interfere.'
When Michael had cut up the leather, he took a thread and began to sew
not with two ends, as boots are sewn, but with a single end, as for soft slippers.
Again Matryóna wondered, but again she did not interfere. Michael
sewed on steadily till noon. Then Simon rose for dinner, looked around, and saw
that Michael had made slippers out of the gentleman's leather.
'Ah!' groaned Simon, and he thought, 'How is it that Michael, who has
been with me a whole year and never made a mistake before, should do such a
dreadful thing? The gentleman ordered high boots, welted, with whole fronts,
and Michael has made soft slippers with single soles, and has wasted the leather.
What am I to say to the gentleman? I can never replace leather such as this.'
And he said to Michael, 'What are you doing friend? You have ruined me!
You know the gentleman ordered high booth but see what you have made!'
Hardly had he begun to rebuke Michael, when 'rat-tat , went the iron ring
that hung at the door. Some one was knocking. They looked out of the window; a
man had come on horseback, and was fastening his horse. They opened the door,
and the servant who had been with the gentleman came in.
'Good day,' said he.
'Good day,' replied Simon. 'What can we do for you?'
'My mistress has sent me about the boots.'
'What about the boots?'
'Why, my master no longer needs them. He is dead.'
'Is it possible?'
'He did not live to get home after leaving you, but died in the carriage.
When we reached home and the servants came to help him alight he rolled over
like a sack. He was dead already, and so stiff that he could hardly be got out of
the carriage. My mistress sent me here, saying: "Tell the bootmaker that the
gentleman who ordered boots of him and left the leather for them no longer
45

needs the boots, but that he must quickly make soft slippers for the corpse. Wait
till they are ready, and bring them back with you." That is why I have come.'
Michael gathered up the remnants of the leather; rolled them up, took the
soft slippers he had made, slapped them together, wiped them down with his
apron, and handed them and the roll of leather to the servant, who took them
and said: 'Good-bye, masters and good day to you!'
VIII
Another year passed, and another, and Michael was now living his sixth
year with Simon. He lived as before. He went nowhere, only spoke when
necessary, and had only smiled twice in all those years -- once when Matryóna
gave him food, and a second time when the gentleman was in their hut. Simon
was more than pleased with his workman. He never now asked him where he
came from, and only feared lest Michael should go away.
They were all at home one day. Matryóna was putting iron pots in the
oven, the children were running along the benches and looking out of the
window; Simon was sewing at one window, and Michael was fastening on a heel
at the other.
One of the boys ran along the bench to Michael, leant on his shoulder, and
looked out of the window.
'Look, Uncle Michael! There is a lady with little girls! She seems to be
coming here. And one of the girls is lame.'
When the boy said that, Michael dropped his work, turned to the window,
and looked out into the street.
Simon was surprised. Michael never used to look out into the street, but
now he pressed against the window, staring at something. Simon also looked
out, and saw that a well-dressed woman was really coming to his hut, leading by
the hand two little girls in fur coats and woollen shawls. The girls could hardly
be told one from the other, except that one of them was crippled in her left leg
and walked with a limp.
The woman stepped into the porch and entered the passage. Feeling about
for the entrance she found the latch, which she lifted, and opened the door. She
let the two girls go in first, and followed them into the hut.
'Good day, good folk!'
'Pray come in,' said Simon. 'What can we do for you?'
The woman sat down by the table. The two little girls pressed close to her
knees, afraid of the people in the hut.
'I want leather shoes made for these two little girls, for spring.'
'We can do that. We never have made such small shoes, but we can make
them; either welted or turnover shoes, linen lined. My man, Michael, is a master
at the work.'
Simon glanced at Michael and saw that he had left his work and was
sitting with his eyes fixed on the little girls. Simon was surprised. It was true the
girls were pretty, with black eyes, plump, and rosy-cheeked, and they wore nice
kerchiefs and fur coats, but still Simon could not understand why Michael
should look at them like that -- just as if he had known them before. He was
46

puzzled, but went on talking with the woman, and arranging the price. Having
fixed it, he prepared the measure. The woman lifted the lame girl on to her lap
and said: 'Take two measures from this little girl. Make one shoe for the lame foot
and three for the sound one. They both have the same sized feet. They are twins.'
Simon took the measure and, speaking of the lame girl, said: 'How did it
happen to her? She is such a pretty girl. Was she born so?'
'No, her mother crushed her leg.'
Then Matryóna joined in. She wondered who this woman was, and whose
the children were, so she said: 'Are not you their mother, then?'
'No, my good woman, I am neither their mother nor any relation to them.
They were quite strangers to me, but I adopted them.'
'They are not your children and yet you are so fond of them?'
'How can I help being fond of them? I fed them both at my own breasts. I
had a child of my own, but God took him. I was not so fond of him as I now am
of them.'
'Then whose children are they?'
IX
The woman, having begun talking, told them the whole story.
'It is about six years since their parents died, both in one week: their father
was buried on the Tuesday, and their mother died on the Friday. These orphans
were born three days after their father's death, and their mother did not live
another day. My husband and I were then living as peasants in the village. We
were neighbours of theirs, our yard being next to theirs. Their father was a lonely
man; a wood-cutter in the forest. When felling trees one day, they let one fall on
him. It fell across his body and crushed his bowels out. They hardly got him
home before his soul went to God; and that same week his wife gave birth to
twins -- these little girls. She was poor and alone; she had no one, young or old,
with her. Alone she gave them birth, and alone she met her death.
'The next morning I went to see her, but when I entered the hut, she, poor
thing, was already stark and cold. In dying she had rolled on to this child and
crushed her leg. The village folk came to the hut washed the body, laid her out,
made a coffin, and buried her. They were good folk. The babies were left alone.
What was to be done with them? I was the only woman there who had a baby at
the time. I was nursing my first-born -- eight weeks old. So I took them for a time.
The peasants came together, and thought and thought what to do with them, and
at last they said to me: "For the present, Mary, you had better keep the girls, and
later on we will arrange what to do for them." So I nursed the sound one at my
breast, but at first I did not feed this crippled one. I did not suppose she would
live. But then I thought to myself, why should the poor innocent suffer? I pitied
her, and began to feed her. And so I fed my own boy and these two -- the three of
them -- at my own breast. I was young and strong, and had good food, and God
gave me so much milk that at times it even overflowed. I used sometimes to feed
two at a time, while the third was waiting. When one had had enough I nursed
the third. And God so ordered it that these grew up, while my own was buried
before he was two years old. And I had no more children, though we prospered.
47

Now my husband is working for the corn merchant at the mill. The pay is good
and we are well off. But I have no children of my own, and how lonely I should
be without these little girls! How can I help loving them! They are the joy of my
life!'
She pressed the lame little girl to her with one hand while with the other
she wiped the tears from her cheeks.
And Matryóna sighed, and said: 'The proverb is true that says, "One may
live without father or mother, but one cannot live without God."'
So they talked together, when suddenly the whole hut was lighted up as
though by summer lightning from the corner where Michael sat. They all looked
towards him and saw him sitting, his hands folded on his knees, gazing upwards
and smiling.
X
The woman went away with the girls. Michael rose from the bench, put
down his work, and took off his apron. Then, bowing low to Simon and his wife,
he said: 'Farewell, masters. God has forgiven me. I ask your forgiveness, too, for
anything done amiss.'
And they saw that a light shone from Michael. And Simon rose, bowed
down to Michael, and said: 'I see, Michael, that you are no common man, and I
can neither keep you nor question you. Only tell me this: how is it that when I
found you and brought you home, you were gloomy, and when my wife gave
you food you smiled at her and became brighter? Then when the gentleman
came to order the boots, you smiled again and became brighter still? And now,
when this woman brought the little girls, you smiled a third time, and have
become as bright as day? Tell me, Michael, why does your face shine so, and why
did you smile those three times?'
And Michael answered: 'Light shines from me because I have been
punished, but now God has pardoned me. And I smiled three times, because
God sent me to learn three truths, and I have learnt them. One I learnt when your
wife pitied me and that is why I smiled the first time. The second I learnt when
the rich man ordered the boots and then I smiled again. And now, when I saw
those little girls, I learnt the third and last truth, and I smiled the third time.'
And Simon said, 'Tell me, Michael, what did God punish you for? and
what were the three truths? that I, too, may know them.'
And Michael answered: 'God punished me for disobeying Him. I was an
angel in heaven and disobeyed God. God sent me to fetch a woman's soul. I flew
to earth, and saw a sick woman lying alone, who had just given birth to twin
girls. They moved feebly at their mother's side, but she could not lift them to her
breast. When she saw me, she understood that God had sent me for her soul, and
she wept and said: "Angel of God! My husband has just been buried, killed by a
falling tree. I have neither sister, nor aunt, nor mother: no one to care for my
orphans. Do not take my soul! Let me nurse my babes, feed them, and set them
on their feet before I die. Children cannot live without father or mother." And I
hearkened to her. I placed one child at her breast and gave the other into her
arms, and returned to the Lord in heaven. I flew to the Lord, and said: "I could
48

not take the soul of the mother. Her husband was killed by a tree; the woman has
twins, and prays that her soul may not be taken. She says: 'Let me nurse and feed
my children, and set them on their feet. Children cannot live without father or
mother.' I have not taken her soul." And God said: "Go -- take the mother's soul,
and learn three truths: Learn What dwells in man, What is not given to man, and
What men live by. When thou hast learnt these things, thou shalt return to
heaven." So I flew again to earth and took the mother's soul. The babes dropped
from her breasts. Her body rolled over on the bed and crushed one babe, twisting
its leg. I rose above the village, wishing to take her soul to God; but a wind seized
me, and my wings drooped and dropped off. Her soul rose alone to God, while I
fell to earth by the roadside.'
XI
And Simon and Matryóna understood who it was that had lived with
them, and whom they had clothed and fed. And they wept with awe and with
joy. And the angel said: 'I was alone in the field, naked. I had never known
human needs, cold and hunger, till I became a man. I was famished, frozen, and
did not know what to do. I saw, near the field I was in, a shrine built for God,
and I went to it hoping to find shelter. But the shrine was locked, and I could not
enter. So I sat down behind the shrine to shelter myself at least from the wind.
Evening drew on. I was hungry, frozen, and in pain. Suddenly I heard a man
coming along the road. He carried a pair of boots, and was talking to himself. For
the first time since I became a man I saw the mortal face of a man, and his face
seemed terrible to me and I turned from it. And I heard the man talking to
himself of how to cover his body from the cold in winter, and how to feed wife
and children. And I thought: "I am perishing of cold and hunger, and here is a
man thinking only of how to clothe himself and his wife, and how to get bread
for themselves. He cannot help me. When the man saw me he frowned and
became still more terrible, and passed me by on the other side. I despaired, but
suddenly I heard him coming back. I looked up, and did not recognize the same
man: before, I had seen death in his face; but now he was alive, and I recognized
in him the presence of God. He came up to me, clothed me, took me with him
and brought me to his home. I entered the house a woman came to meet us and
began to speak. The woman was still more terrible than the man had been; the
spirit of death came from her mouth; I could not breathe for the stench of death
that spread around her. She wished to drive me out into the cold, and I knew that
if she did so she would die. Suddenly her husband spoke to her of God, and the
woman changed at once. And when she brought me food and looked at me, I
glanced at her and saw that death no longer dwelt in her; she had become alive,
and in her too I saw God.
'Then I remembered the first lesson God had set me: "Learn what dwells in
man." And I understood that in man dwells Love! I was glad that God had
already begun to show me what He had promised, and I smiled for the first time.
But I had not yet learnt all. I did not yet know What is not given to man, and What
men live by.
49

'I lived with you, and a year passed. A man came to order boots that
should wear for a year without losing shape or cracking. I looked at him, and
suddenly, behind his shoulder, I saw my comrade -- the angel of death. None but
me saw that angel; but I knew him, and knew that before the sun set he would
take that rich man's soul. And I thought to myself, "The man is making
preparations for a year, and does not know that he will die before evening." And
I remembered God's second saying, "Learn what is not given to man."
'What dwells in man I already knew. Now I learnt what is not given him.
It is not given to man to know his own needs. And I smiled for the second time. I
was glad to have seen my comrade angel -- glad also that God had revealed to
me the second saying.
'But I still did not know all. I did not know What men live by. And I lived
on, waiting till God should reveal to me the last lesson. In the sixth year came the
girl-twins with the woman; and I recognized the girls, and heard how they had
been kept alive. Having heard the story, I thought, "Their mother besought me
for the children's sake, and I believed her when she said that children cannot live
without father or mother; but a stranger has nursed them, and has brought them
up." And when the woman showed her love for the children that were not her
own, and wept over them, I saw in her the living God, and understood What men
live by. And I knew that God had revealed to me the last lesson, and had forgiven
my sin. And then I smiled for the third time.'
XII
And the angel's body was bared, and he was clothed in light so that eye
could not look on him; and his voice grew louder, as though it came not from
him but from heaven above. And the angel said:
'I have learnt that all men live not by care for themselves, but by love.
'It was not given to the mother to know what her children needed for their
life. Nor was it given to the rich man to know what he himself needed. Nor is it
given to any man to know whether, when evening comes, he will need boots for
his body or slippers for his corpse.
'I remained alive when I was a man, not by care of myself, but because
love was present in a passer-by, and because he and his wife pitied and loved
me. The orphans remained alive, not because of their mother's care, but because
there was love in the heart of a woman a stranger to them, who pitied and loved
them. And all men live not by the thought they spend on their own welfare, but
because love exists in man.
'I knew before that God gave life to men and desires that they should live;
now I understood more than that.
'I understood that God does not wish men to live apart, and therefore he
does not reveal to them what each one needs for himself; but he wishes them to
live united, and therefore reveals to each of them what is necessary for all.
'I have now understood that though it seems to men that they live by care
for themselves, in truth it is love alone by which they live. He who has love, is in
God, and God is in him, for God is love.'
50

And the angel sang praise to God, so that the hut trembled at his voice.
The roof opened, and a column of fire rose from earth to heaven. Simon and his
wife and children fell to the ground. Wings appeared upon the angel's shoulders,
and he rose into the heavens.
And when Simon came to himself the hut stood as before, and there was
no one in it but his own family.
1881.

51

5

A SPARK NEGLECTED BURNS THE HOUSE
'Then came Peter, and said to him, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? until seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I say not
unto thee, Until seven times; but, Until seventy times seven. Therefore is the
kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, which would make a reckoning
with his servants. And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him,
which owed him ten thousand talents. But forasmuch as he had not wherewith to
pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that
he had, and payment to be made. The servant therefore fell down and
worshipped him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
And the lord of that servant, being moved with compassion, released him, and
forgave him the debt. But that servant went out, and found one of his fellowservants, which owed him a hundred pence: and he laid hold on him, and took
him by the throat saying, Pay what thou owest. So his fellow-servant fell down
and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee. And he
would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay that which was
due. So when his fellow-servants saw what was done, they were exceeding sorry,
and came and told unto their lord all that was done. Then his lord called him
unto him, and saith to him, Thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt,
because thou besoughtest me: shouldest not thou also have had mercy on thy
fellow-servant, even as I had mercy on thee? And his lord was wroth, and
delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due. So shall also
my heavenly Father do unto you, if ye forgive not every one his brother from
your hearts.' -- Matt. xviii. 21-35.
THERE once lived in a village a peasant named Iván Stcherbakóf. He was
comfortably off, in the prime of life, the best worker in the village, and had three
sons all able to work. The eldest was married, the second about to marry, and the
third was a big lad who could mind the horses and was already beginning to
plough. Ivan's wife was an able and thrifty woman, and they were fortunate in
having a quiet, hard-working daughter-in-law. There was nothing to prevent
Iván and his family from living happily. They had only one idle mouth to feed;
that was Iván's old father, who suffered from asthma and had been lying ill on
the top of the brick oven for seven years. Iván had all he needed: three horses
and a colt, a cow with a calf, and fifteen sheep. The women made all the clothing
for the family, besides helping in the fields, and the men tilled the land. They
always had grain enough of their own to last over beyond the next harvest and
sold enough oats to pay the taxes and meet their other needs. So Iván and his
children might have lived quite comfortably had it not been for a feud between
him and his next-door neighbour, Limping Gabriel, the son of Gordéy Ivánof.
As long as old Gordéy was alive and Iván's father was still able to manage
the household, the peasants lived as neighbours should. If the women of either
house happened to want a sieve or a tub, or the men required a sack, or if a cart52

wheel got broken and could not be mended at once, they used to send to the
other house, and helped each other in neighbourly fashion. When a calf strayed
into the neighbour's thrashing-ground they would just drive it out, and only say,
'Don't let it get in again; our grain is lying there.' And such things as locking up
the barns and outhouses, hiding things from one another, or backbiting were
never thought of in those days.
That was in the fathers' time. When the sons came to be at the head of the
families, everything changed.
It all began about a trifle.
Iván's daughter-in-law had a hen that began laying rather early in the
season, and she started collecting its eggs for Easter. Every day she went to the
cart-shed, and found an egg in the cart; but one day the hen, probably frightened
by the children, flew across the fence into the neighbour's yard and laid its egg
there. The woman heard the cackling, but said to herself: 'I have no time now; I
must tidy up for Sunday. I'll fetch the egg later on.' In the evening she went to the
cart, but found no egg there. She went and asked her mother-in-law and brotherin-law whether they had taken the egg. 'No,' they had not; but her youngest
brother-in-law, Tarás, said: 'Your Biddy laid its egg in the neighbour's yard. It
was there she was cackling, and she flew back across the fence from there.'
The woman went and looked at the hen. There she was on the perch with
the other birds, her eyes just closing ready to go to sleep. The woman wished she
could have asked the hen and got an answer from her.
Then she went to the neighbour's, and Gabriel's mother came out to meet
her.
'What do you want, young woman?'
'Why, Granny, you see, my hen flew across this morning. Did she not lay
an egg here?'
'We never saw anything of it. The Lord be thanked, our own hens started
laying long ago. We collect our own eggs and have no need of other people's!
And we don't go looking for eggs in other people's yards, lass!'
The young woman was offended, and said more than she should have
done. Her neighbour answered back with interest, and the women began abusing
each other. Ivan's wife, who had been to fetch water, happening to pass just then,
joined in too. Gabriel's wife rushed out, and began reproaching the young
woman with things that had really happened and with other things that never
had happened at all. Then a general uproar commenced, all shouting at once,
trying to get out two words at a time, and not choice words either.
'You're this!' and 'You're that!' 'You're a thief!' and 'You're a slut!' and
'You're starving your old father-in-law to death!' and 'You're a good-for-nothing!'
and so on.
'And you've made a hole in the sieve I lent you, you jade! And it's our
yoke you're carrying your pails on -- you just give back our yoke!'
Then they caught hold of the yoke, and spilt the water, snatched off one
another's shawls, and began fighting. Gabriel, returning from the fields, stopped
to take his wife's part. Out rushed Iván and his son and joined in with the rest.
Iván was a strong fellow, he scattered the whole lot of them, and pulled a
53

handful of hair out of Gabriel's beard. People came to see what was the matter,
and the fighters were separated with difficulty.
That was how it all began.
Gabriel wrapped the hair torn from his beard in a paper, and went to the
District Court to have the law of Iván. 'I didn't grow my beard,' said he, 'for
pockmarked Iván to pull it out!' And his wife went bragging to the neighbours,
saying they'd have Iván condemned and sent to Siberia. And so the feud grew.
The old man, from where he lay on the top of the oven, tried from the very
first to persuade them to make peace, but they would not listen. He told them,
'It's a stupid thing you are after, children, picking quarrels about such a paltry
matter. Just think! The whole thing began about an egg. The children may have
taken it -- well, what matter? What's the value of one egg? God sends enough for
all! And suppose your neighbour did say an unkind word -- put it right; show
her how to say a better one! If there has been a fight -- well, such things will
happen; we're all sinners, but make it up, and let there be an end of it! If you
nurse your anger it will be worse for you yourselves.'
But the younger folk would not listen to the old man. They thought his
words were mere senseless dotage. Iván would not humble himself before his
neighbour.
'I never pulled his beard,' he said, 'he pulled the hair out himself. But his
son has burst all the fastenings on my shirt, and torn it. . . . Look at it!'
And Iván also went to law. They were tried by the Justice of the Peace and
by the District Court. While all this was going on, the coupling-pin of Gabriel's
cart disappeared. Gabriel's womenfolk accused Ivan's son of having taken it.
They said: 'We saw him in the night go past our window, towards the cart; and a
neighbour says he saw him at the pub, offering the pin to the landlord.'
So they went to law about that. And at home not a day passed without a
quarrel or even a fight. The children, too, abused one another, having learnt to do
so from their elders; and when the women happened to meet by the river-side,
where they went to rinse the clothes, their arms did not do as much wringing as
their tongues did nagging, and every word was a bad one.
At first the peasants only slandered one another; but afterwards they
began in real earnest to snatch anything that lay handy, and the children
followed their example. Life became harder and harder for them. Iván
Stcherbakóf and Limping Gabriel kept suing one another at the Village
Assembly, and at the District Court, and before the Justice of the Peace until all
the judges were tired of them. Now Gabriel got Iván fined or imprisoned; then
Iván did as much to Gabriel; and the more they spited each other the angrier they
grew -- like dogs that attack one another and get more and more furious the
longer they fight. You strike one dog from behind, and it thinks it's the other dog
biting him, and gets still fiercer. So these peasants: they went to law, and one or
other of them was fined or locked up, but that only made them more and more
angry with each other. 'Wait a bit,' they said, 'and I'll make you pay for it.' And so
it went on for six years. Only the old man lying on the top of the oven kept
telling them again and again: 'Children, what are you doing? Stop all this paying
back; keep to your work, and don't bear malice -- it will be better for you. The
more you bear malice, the worse it will be.'
54

But they would not listen to him.
In the seventh year, at a wedding, Ivan's daughter-in-law held Gabriel up
to shame, accusing him of having been caught horse-stealing. Gabriel was tipsy,
and unable to contain his anger, gave the woman such a blow that she was laid
up for a week; and she was pregnant at the time. Iván was delighted. He went to
the magistrate to lodge a complaint. 'Now I'll get rid of my neighbour! He won't
escape imprisonment, or exile to Siberia.' But Ivan's wish was not fulfilled. The
magistrate dismissed the case. The woman was examined, but she was up and
about and showed no sign of any injury. Then Ivan went to the Justice of the
Peace, but he referred the business to the District Court. Ivan bestirred himself:
treated the clerk and the Elder of the District Court to a gallon of liquor and got
Gabriel condemned to be flogged. The sentence was read out to Gabriel by the
clerk: 'The Court decrees that the peasant Gabriel Gordéyef shall receive twenty
lashes with a birch rod at the District Court.'
Ivan too heard the sentence read, and looked at Gabriel to see how he
would take it. Gabriel grew as pale as a sheet, and turned round and went out
into the passage. Ivan followed him, meaning to see to the horse, and he
overheard Gabriel say, 'Very well! He will have my back flogged: that will make
it burn; but something of his may burn worse than that!'
Hearing these words, Ivan at once went back into the Court, and said:
'Upright judges! He threatens to set my house on fire! Listen: he said it in the
presence of witnesses!'
Gabriel was recalled. 'Is it true that you said this?'
'I haven't said anything. Flog me, since you have the power. It seems that I
alone am to suffer, and all for being in the right, while he is allowed to do as he
likes.'
Gabriel wished to say something more, but his lips and his cheeks
quivered, and he turned towards the wall. Even the officials were frightened by
his looks. 'He may do some mischief to himself or to his neighbour,' thought
they.
Then the old Judge said: 'Look here, my men; you'd better be reasonable
and make it up. Was it right of you, friend Gabriel, to strike a pregnant woman?
It was lucky it passed off so well, but think what might have happened! Was it
right? You had better confess and beg his pardon, and he will forgive you, and
we will alter the sentence.'
The clerk heard these words, and remarked: 'That's impossible under
Statute 117. An agreement between the parties not having been arrived at, a
decision of the Court has been pronounced and must be executed.'
But the Judge would not listen to the clerk.
'Keep your tongue still, my friend,' said he. 'The first of all laws is to obey
God, Who loves peace.' And the Judge began again to persuade the peasants, but
could not succeed. Gabriel would not listen to him.
'I shall be fifty next year,' said he, 'and have a married son, and have never
been flogged in my life, and now that pockmarked Ivan has had me condemned
to be flogged, and am I to go and ask his forgiveness? No; I've borne enough. . . .
Ivan shall have cause to remember me!'
55

Again Gabriel's voice quivered, and he could say no more, but turned
round and went out.
It was seven miles from the Court to the village, and it was getting late
when Ivan reached home. He unharnessed his horse, put it up for the night, and
entered the cottage. No one was there. The women had already gone to drive the
cattle in, and the young fellows were not yet back from the fields. Iván went in,
and sat down, thinking. He remembered how Gabriel had listened to the
sentence, and how pale he had become, and how he had turned to the wall; and
Ivan's heart grew heavy. He thought how he himself would feel if he were
sentenced, and he pitied Gabriel. Then he heard his old father up on the oven
cough, and saw him sit up, lower his legs, and scramble down. The old man
dragged himself slowly to a seat, and sat down. He was quite tired out with the
exertion, and coughed a long time till he had cleared his throat. Then, leaning
against the table, he said: 'Well, has he been condemned?'
'Yes, to twenty strokes with the rods,' answered Iván.
The old man shook his head.
'A bad business,' said he. 'You are doing wrong, Iván! Ah! it's very bad -not for him so much as for yourself! . . . Well, they'll flog him: but will that do
you any good?'
'He'll not do it again,' said Iván.
'What is it he'll not do again? What has he done worse than you?'
'Why, think of the harm he has done me!' said Iván. 'He nearly killed my
wife, and now he's threatening to burn us up. Am I to thank him for it?'
The old man sighed, and said: 'You go about the wide world, Iván, while I
am lying on the oven all these years, so you think you see everything, and that I
see nothing. . . . Ah, lad! It's you that don't see; malice blinds you. Others' sins are
before your eyes, but your own are behind your back. "He's acted badly!" What a
thing to say! If he were the only one to act badly, how could strife exist? Is strife
among men ever bred by one alone? Strife is always between two. His badness
you see, but your own you don't. If he were bad, but you were good, there would
be no strife. Who pulled the hair out of his beard? Who spoilt his haystack? Who
dragged him to the law court? Yet you put it all on him! You live a bad life
yourself, that's what is wrong! It's not the way I used to live, lad, and it's not the
way I taught you. Is that the way his old father and I used to live? How did we
live? Why, as neighbours should! If he happened to run out of flour, one of the
women would come across: "Uncle Trol, we want some flour." "Go to the barn,
dear," I'd say: "take what you need." If he'd no one to take his horses to pasture,
"Go, Iván," I'd say, "and look after his horses." And if I was short of anything, I'd
go to him. "Uncle Gordéy," I'd say, "I want so-and-so!" "Take it Uncle Trol!" That's
how it was between us, and we had an easy time of it. But now? . . . That soldier
the other day was telling us about the fight at Plevna9 . Why, there's war between
you worse than at Plevna! Is that living? . . . What a sin it is! You are a man and
master of the house; it's you who will have to answer. What are you teaching the
women and the children? To snarl and snap? Why, the other day your Taráska -that greenhorn -- was swearing at neighbour Irena, calling her names; and his
9 A town in Bulgaria, the scene of fierce and prolonged fighting between the Turks and the

Russians in the war of 1877.

56

mother listened and laughed. Is that right? It is you will have to answer. Think of
your soul. Is this all as it should be? You throw a word at me, and I give you two
in return; you give me a blow, and I give you two. No, lad! Christ, when He
walked on earth, taught us fools something very different. . . . If you get a hard
word from any one, keep silent, and his own conscience will accuse him. That is
what our Lord taught. If you get a slap, turn the other cheek. "Here, beat me, if
that's what I deserve!" And his own conscience will rebuke him. He will soften,
and will listen to you. That's the way He taught us, not to be proud! . . . Why
don't you speak? Isn't it as I say?'
Iván sat silent and listened.
The old man coughed, and having with difficulty cleared his throat, began
again: 'You think Christ taught us wrong? Why, it's all for our own good. Just
think of your earthly life; are you better off, or worse, since this Plevna began
among you? Just reckon up what you've spent on all this law business -- what
the driving backwards and forwards and your food on the way have cost you!
What fine fellows your sons have grown; you might live and get on well; but
now your means are lessening. And why? All because of this folly; because of
your pride. You ought to be ploughing with your lads, and do the sowing
yourself; but the fiend carries you off to the judge, or to some pettifogger or
other. The ploughing is not done in time, nor the sowing, and mother earth can't
bear properly. Why did the oats fail this year? When did you sow them? When
you came back from town! And what did you gain? A burden for your own
shoulders. . . . Eh, lad, think of your own business! Work with your boys in the
field and at home, and if some one offends you, forgive him, as God wished you
to. Then life will be easy, and your heart will always be light.'
Iván remained silent.
'Iván, my boy, hear your old father! Go and harness the roan, and go at
once to the Government office; put an end to all this affair there; and in the
morning go and make it up with Gabriel in God's name, and invite him to your
house for to-morrow's holiday' (it was the eve of the Virgin's Nativity). 'Have tea
ready, and get a bottle of vódka and put an end to this wicked business, so that
there should not be any more of it in future, and tell the women and children to
do the same.'
Iván sighed, and thought, 'What he says is true,' and his heart grew
lighter. Only he did not know how, now, to begin to put matters right.
But again the old man began, as if he had guessed what was in Ivan's
mind.
'Go, Iván, don't put it off! Put out the fire before it spreads, or it will be too
late.'
The old man was going to say more, but before he could do so the women
came in, chattering like magpies. The news that Gabriel was sentenced to be
flogged, and of his threat to set fire to the house, had already reached them. They
had heard all about it and added to it something of their own, and had again had
a row, in the pasture, with the women of Gabriel's household. They began telling
how Gabriel's daughter-in-law threatened a fresh action: Gabriel had got the
right side of the examining magistrate, who would now turn the whole affair
upside down; and the schoolmaster was writing out another petition, to the Tsar
57

himself this time, about Iván; and everything was in the petition -- all about the
coupling-pin and the kitchen-garden -- so that half of Ivan's homestead would be
theirs soon. Iván heard what they were saying, and his heart grew cold again,
and he gave up the thought of making peace with Gabriel.
In a farmstead there is always plenty for the master to do. Iván did not
stop to talk to the women, but went out to the threshing-floor and to the barn. By
the time he had tidied up there, the sun had set and the young fellows had
returned from the field. They had been ploughing the field for the winter crops
with two horses. Iván met them, questioned them about their work, helped to
put everything in its place, set a torn horse-collar aside to be mended, and was
going to put away some stakes under the barn, but it had grown quite dusk, so
he decided to leave them where they were till next day. Then he gave the cattle
their food, opened the gate, let out the horses. Tarás was to take to pasture for the
night, and again closed the gate and barred it. 'Now,' thought he, 'I'll have my
supper, and then to bed.' He took the horse-collar and entered the hut. By this
time he had forgotten about Gabriel and about what his old father had been
saying to him. But, just as he took hold of the door-handle to enter the passage,
he heard his neighbour on the other side of the fence cursing somebody in a
hoarse voice: 'What the devil is he good for?' Gabriel was saying. 'He's only fit to
be killed!' At these words all Ivan's former bitterness towards his neighbour reawoke. He stood listening while Gabriel scolded, and, when he stopped, Iván
went into the hut.
There was a light inside; his daughter-in-law sat spinning, his wife was
getting supper ready, his eldest son was making straps for bark shoes, his second
sat near the table with a book, and Tarás was getting ready to go out to pasture
the horses for the night. Everything in the hut would have been pleasant and
bright, but for that plague -- a bad neighbour!
Iván entered, sullen and cross; threw the cat down from the bench, and
scolded the women for putting the slop-pail in the wrong place. He felt
despondent, and sat down, frowning, to mend the horse-collar. Gabriel's words
kept ringing in his ears: his threat at the law court, and what he had just been
shouting in a hoarse voice about some one who was 'only fit to be killed.'
His wife gave Tarás his supper, and, having eaten it, Tarás put on an old
sheepskin and another coat, tied a sash round his waist, took some bread with
him, and went out to the horses. His eldest brother was going to see him off, but
Iván himself rose instead, and went out into the porch. It had grown quite dark
outside, clouds had gathered, and the wind had risen. Iván went down the steps,
helped his boy to mount, started the foal after him, and stood listening while
Tarás rode down the village and was there joined by other lads with their horses.
Iván waited until they were all out of hearing. As he stood there by the gate he
could not get Gabriel's words out of his head: 'Mind that something of yours
does not burn worse!'
'He is desperate,' thought Iván. 'Everything is dry, and it's windy weather
besides. He'll come up at the back somewhere, set fire to something, and be off.
He'll burn the place and escape scot free, the villain! . . . There now, if one could
but catch him in the act, he'd not get off then!' And the thought fixed itself so
firmly in his mind that he did not go up the steps but went out into the street and
58

round the corner. I'll just walk round the buildings; who can tell what he's after?'
And Iván, stepping softly, passed out of the gate. As soon as he reached the
corner, he looked round along the fence, and seemed to see something suddenly
move at the opposite corner, as if some one had come out and disappeared again.
Iván stopped, and stood quietly, listening and looking. Everything was still; only
the leaves of the willows fluttered in the wind, and the straws of the thatch
rustled. At first it seemed pitch dark, but, when his eyes had grown used to the
darkness, he could see the far corner, and a plough that lay there, and the eaves.
He looked a while, but saw no one.
'I suppose it was a mistake,' thought Iván; 'but still I will go round,' and
Iván went stealthily along by the shed. Iván stepped so softly in his bark shoes
that he did not hear his own footsteps. As he reached the far corner, something
seemed to flare up for a moment near the plough and to vanish again. Iván felt as
if struck to the heart; and he stopped. Hardly had he stopped, when something
flared up more brightly in the same place, and he clearly saw a man with a cap
on his head, crouching down, with his back towards him, lighting a bunch of
straw he held in his hand. Iván's heart fluttered within him like a bird. Straining
every nerve, he approached with great strides, hardly feeling his legs under him.
'Ah,' thought Iván, 'now he won't escape! I'll catch him in the act!'
Iván was still some distance off, when suddenly he saw a bright light, but
not in the same place as before, and not a small flame. The thatch had flared up
at the eaves, the flames were reaching up to the roof, and, standing beneath it,
Gabriel's whole figure was clearly visible.
Like a hawk swooping down on a lark, Iván rushed at Limping Gabriel.
'Now I'll have him; he shan't escape me!' thought Iván. But Gabriel must have
heard his steps, and (however he managed it) glancing round, he scuttled away
past the barn like a hare.
'You shan't escape!' shouted Iván, darting after him.
Just as he was going to seize Gabriel, the latter dodged him; but Iván
managed to catch the skirt of Gabriel's coat. It tore right off, and Iván fell down.
He recovered his feet, and shouting, 'Help! Seize him! Thieves! Murder!' ran on
again. But meanwhile Gabriel had reached his own gate. There Iván overtook
him and was about to seize him, when something struck Iván a stunning blow, as
though a stone had hit his temple, quite deafening him. It was Gabriel who,
seizing an oak wedge that lay near the gate, had struck out with all his might.
Iván was stunned; sparks flew before his eyes, then all grew dark and he
staggered. When he came to his senses Gabriel was no longer there: it was as
light as day, and from the side where his homestead was something roared and
crackled like an engine at work. Iván turned round and saw that his back shed
was all ablaze, and the side shed had also caught fire, and flames and smoke and
bits of burning straw mixed with the smoke, were being driven towards his hut.
'What is this, friends? . . .' cried Iván, lifting his arms and striking his
thighs.' Why, all I had to do was just to snatch it out from under the eaves and
trample on it! What is this, friends? . . .' he kept repeating. He wished to shout,
but his breath failed him; his voice was gone. He wanted to run, but his legs
would not obey him, and got in each other's way. He moved slowly, but again
staggered and again his breath failed. He stood still till he had regained breath,
59

and then went on. Before he had got round the back shed to reach the fire, the
side shed was also all ablaze; and the corner of the hut and the covered gateway
had caught fire as well. The flames were leaping out of the hut, and it was
impossible to get into the yard. A large crowd had collected, but nothing could
be done. The neighbours were carrying their belongings out of their own houses,
and driving the cattle out of their own sheds. After Ivan's house, Gabriel's also
caught fire, then, the wind rising, the flames spread to the other side of the street
and half the village was burnt down.
At Ivan's house they barely managed to save his old father; and the family
escaped in what they had on; everything else, except the horses that had been
driven out to pasture for the night, was lost; all the cattle, the fowls on their
perches, the carts, ploughs, and harrows, the women's trunks with their clothes,
and the grain in the granaries -- all were burnt up!
At Gabriel's, the cattle were driven out, and a few things saved from his
house.
The fire lasted all night. Iván stood in front of his homestead and kept
repeating, 'What is this? . . . Friends! . . . One need only have pulled it out and
trampled on it!' But when the roof fell in, Iván rushed into the burning place, and
seizing a charred beam, tried to drag it out. The women saw him, and called him
back; but he pulled out the beam, and was going in again for another when he
lost his footing and fell among the flames. Then his son made his way in after
him and dragged him out. Iván had singed his hair and beard and burnt his
clothes and scorched his hands, but he felt nothing. 'His grief has stupefied him,'
said the people. The fire was burning itself out, but Iván still stood repeating:
'Friends! . . . What is this? . . . One need only have pulled it out!'
In the morning the village Elder's son came to fetch Iván.
'Daddy Iván, your father is dying! He has sent for you to say good-bye.'
Iván had forgotten about his father, and did not understand what was
being said to him.
'What father?' he said. 'Whom has he sent for?'
'He sent for you, to say good-bye; he is dying in our cottage! Come along,
daddy Iván,' said the Elder's son, pulling him by the arm; and Iván followed the
lad.
When he was being carried out of the hut, some burning straw had fallen
on to the old man and burnt him, and he had been taken to the village Elder's in
the farther part of the village, which the fire did not reach.
When Iván came to his father, there was only the Elder's wife in the hut,
besides some little children on the top of the oven. All the rest were still at the
fire. The old man, who was lying on a bench holding a wax candle10 in his hand,
kept turning his eyes towards the door. When his son entered, he moved a little.
The old woman went up to him and told him that his son had come. He asked to
have him brought nearer. Iván came closer.
'What did I tell you, Iván?' began the old man 'Who has burnt down the
village?'
10Wax candles are much used in the services of the Russian Church, and it is usual to place one in

the hand of a dying man, especially when he receives unction.

60

'It was he, father!' Iván answered. 'I caught him in the act. I saw him shove
the firebrand into the thatch. I might have pulled away the burning straw and
stamped it out, and then nothing would have happened.'
'Iván,' said the old man, 'I am dying, and you in your turn will have to face
death. Whose is the sin?'
Iván gazed at his father in silence, unable to utter a word.
'Now, before God, say whose is the sin? What did I tell you?'
Only then Iván came to his senses and understood it all. He sniffed and
said, 'Mine, father!' And he fell on his knees before his father, saying, 'Forgive
me, father; I am guilty before you and before God.'
The old man moved his hands, changed the candle from his right hand to
his left, and tried to lift his right hand to his forehead to cross himself, but could
not do it, and stopped.
'Praise the Lord! Praise the Lord!' said he, and again he turned his eyes
towards his son.
'Iván! I say, Iván!'
'What, father?'
'What must you do now?'
Iván was weeping.
'I don't know how we are to live now, father!' he said.
The old man closed his eyes, moved his lips as if to gather strength, and
opening his eyes again, said: 'You'll manage. If you obey God's will, you'll
manage!' He paused, then smiled, and said: 'Mind, Iván! Don't tell who started
the fire! Hide another man's sin, and God will forgive two of yours!' And the old
man took the candle in both hands and, folding them on his breast, sighed,
stretched out, and died.
Iván did not say anything against Gabriel, and no one knew what had
caused the fire.
And Ivan's anger against Gabriel passed away, and Gabriel wondered that
Iván did not tell anybody. At first Gabriel felt afraid, but after awhile he got used
to it. The men left off quarrelling, and then their families left off also. While
rebuilding their huts, both families lived in one house; and when the village was
rebuilt and they might have moved farther apart, Iván and Gabriel built next to
each other, and remained neighbours as before.
They lived as good neighbours should. Iván Stcherbakóf remembered his
old father's command to obey God's law, and quench a fire at the first spark; and
if any one does him an injury he now tries not to revenge himself, but rather to
set matters right again; and if any one gives him a bad word, instead of giving a
worse in return, he tries to teach the other not to use evil words; and so he
teaches his womenfolk and children. And Iván Stcherbakóf has got on his feet
again, and now lives better even than he did before.
1885.

61

6

TWO OLD MEN
'The woman saith unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. Our
fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place
where men ought to worship. Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour
cometh when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the
Father. . . . But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and truth: for such doth the Father seek to be his
worshippers.' -- John iv. 19-21, 23.
THERE were once two old men who decided to go on a pilgrimage to worship
God at Jerusalem. One of them was a well-to-do peasant named Efím Tarásitch
Shevélef. The other, Elisha Bódrof, was not so well off.
Efím was a staid man, serious and firm. He neither drank nor smoked nor
took snuff, and had never used bad language in his life. He had twice served as
village Elder, and when he left office his accounts were in good order. He had a
large family: two sons and a married grandson, all living with him. He was hale,
long-bearded and erect, and it was only when he was past sixty that a little grey
began to show itself in his beard.
Elisha was neither rich nor poor. He had formerly gone out carpentering,
but now that he was growing old he stayed at home and kept bees. One of his
sons had gone away to find work, the other was living at home. Elisha was a
kindly and cheerful old man. It is true he drank sometimes, and he took snuff,
and was fond of singing, but he was a peaceable man, and lived on good terms
with his family and with his neighbours. He was short and dark, with a curly
beard, and, like his patron saint Elisha, he was quite bald-headed.
The two old men had taken a vow long since and had arranged to go on a
pilgrimage to Jerusalem together: but Efím could never spare the time; he always
had so much business on hand; as soon as one thing was finished he started
another. First he had to arrange his grandson's marriage; then to wait for his
youngest son's return from the army, and after that he began building a new hut.
One holiday the two old men met outside the hut and, sitting down on
some timber, began to talk.
'Well,' asked Elisha, 'when are we to fulfil our vow?'
Efím made a wry face.
'We must wait,' he said. 'This year has turned out a hard one for me. I
started building this hut thinking it would cost me something over a hundred
roubles, but now it's getting on for three hundred and it's still not finished. We
shall have to wait tin the summer. In summer, God willing, we will go without
fail.'
'It seems to me we ought not to put it off, but should go at once,' said
Elisha. 'Spring is the best time.'
'The time's right enough, but what about my building? How can I leave
that?'
62

'As if you had no one to leave in charge! Your son can look after it.'
'But how? My eldest son is not trustworthy -- he sometimes takes a glass
too much.'
'Ah, neighbour, when we die they'll get on without us. Let your son begin
now to get some experience.'
'That's true enough, but somehow when one begins a thing one likes to see
it done.'
'Eh, friend, we can never get through all we have to do. The other day the
women-folk at home were washing and house cleaning for Easter. Here
something needed doing, there something else, and they could not get
everything done. So my eldest daughter-in-law, who's a sensible woman, says:
'We may be thankful the holiday comes without waiting for us, or however hard
we worked we should never be ready for it.'
Efím became thoughtful.
'I've spent a lot of money on this building,' he said 'and one can't start on
the journey with empty pockets. We shall want a hundred roubles apiece -- and
it's no small sum.'
Elisha laughed.
'Now, come, come, old friend!' he said, 'you have ten times as much as I,
and yet you talk about money. Only say when we are to start, and though I have
nothing now I shall have enough by then.'
Efím also smiled.
'Dear me, I did not know you were so rich!' said he. 'Why, where will you
get it from?'
'I can scrape some together at home, and if that's not enough, I'll sell half a
score of hives to my neighbour. He's long been wanting to buy them.'
'If they swarm well this year, you'll regret it.'
'Regret it! Not I, neighbour! I never regretted anything in my life, except
my sins. There's nothing more precious than the soul.'
'That's so; still it's not right to neglect things at home.'
'But what if our souls are neglected? That's worse. We took the vow, so let
us go! Now, seriously, let us go!'
II
Elisha succeeded in persuading his comrade. In the morning, after
thinking it well over, Efím came to Elisha.
'You are right,' said he, 'let us go. Life and death are in God's hands. We
must go now, while we are still alive and have the strength.'
A week later the old men were ready to start. Efím had money enough at
hand. He took a hundred roubles himself, and left two hundred with his wife.
Elisha, too, got ready. He sold ten hives to his neighbour, with any new
swarms that might come from them before the summer. He took seventy roubles
for the lot. The rest of the hundred roubles he scraped together from the other
members of his household, fairly clearing them all out. His wife gave him all she
had been saving up for her funeral; and his daughter-in-law also gave him what
she had.
63

Efím gave his eldest son definite orders about every thing: when and how
much grass to mow, where to cart the manure, and how to finish off and roof the
cottage. He thought out everything, and gave his orders accordingly. Elisha, on
the other hand, only explained to his wife that she was to keep separate the
swarms from the hives he had sold, and to be sure to let the neighbour have
them all, without any tricks. As to household affairs, he did not even mention
them.
'You will see what to do and how to do it, as the needs arise,' he said. 'You
are the masters, and will know how to do what's best for yourselves.'
So the old men got ready. Their people baked them cakes, and made bags
for them, and cut them linen for leg-bands11. They put on new leather shoes, and
took with them spare shoes of platted bark. Their families went with them to the
end of the village and there took leave of them, and the old men started on their
pilgrimage.
Elisha left home in a cheerful mood, and as soon as he was out of the
village forgot all his home affairs. His only care was how to please his comrade,
how to avoid saying a rude word to any one, how to get to his destination and
home again in peace and love. Walking along the road, Elisha would either
whisper some prayer to himself or go over in his mind such of the lives of the
saints as he was able to remember. When he came across any one on the road, or
turned in anywhere for the night, he tried to behave as gently as possible and to
say a godly word. So he journeyed on, rejoicing. One thing only he could not do,
he could not give up taking snuff. Though he had left his snuff-box behind, he
hankered after it. Then a man he met on the road gave him some snuff; and every
now and then he would lag behind (not to lead his comrade into temptation) and
would take a pinch of snuff.
Efím too walked well and firmly; doing no wrong and speaking no vain
words, but his heart was not so light. Household cares weighed on his mind. He
kept worrying about what was going on at home. Had he not forgotten to give
his son this or that order? Would his son do things properly? If he happened to
see potatoes being planted or manure carted, as he went along, he wondered if
his son was doing as he had been told. And he almost wanted to turn back and
show him how to do things, or even do them himself.
III
The old men had been walking for five weeks, they had worn out their
home-made bark shoes, and had to begin buying new ones when they reached
Little Russia12. From the time they left home they had had to pay for their food
and for their night's lodging, but when they reached Little Russia the people vied
with one another in asking them into their huts. They took them in and fed them,
and would accept no payment; and more than that, they put bread or even cakes
into their bags for them to eat on the road.

11Worn by Russian peasants instead of stockings.
12Little Russia is situated in the south-western part of Russia, and consists of the Governments of

Kief, Poltava, Tchernigof, and part of Kharkof and Kherson.

64

The old men travelled some five hundred miles in this manner free of
expense, but after they had crossed the next province, they came to a district
where the harvest had failed. The peasants still gave them free lodging at night,
but no longer fed them for nothing. Sometimes, even, they could get no bread:
they offered to pay for it, but there was none to be had. The people said the
harvest had completely failed the year before. Those who had been rich were
ruined and had had to sell all they possessed; those of moderate means were left
destitute, and those of the poor who had not left those parts, wandered about
begging, or starved at home in utter want. In the winter they had had to eat
husks and goosefoot.
One night the old men stopped in a small village; they bought fifteen
pounds of bread, slept there, and started before sunrise, to get well on their way
before the heat of the day. When they had gone some eight miles, on coming to a
stream they sat down, and, filling a bowl with water, they steeped some bread in
it, and ate it. Then they changed their leg-bands, and rested for a while. Elisha
took out his snuff-box. Efím shook his head at him.
'How is it you don't give up that nasty habit?' said he.
Elisha waved his hand. 'The evil habit is stronger than I,' he said.
Presently they got up and went on. After walking for nearly another eight
miles, they came to a large village and passed right through it. It had now grown
hot. Elisha was tired out and wanted to rest and have a drink, but Efím did not
stop. Efím was the better walker of the two, and Elisha found it hard to keep up
with him.
'If I could only have a drink,' said he.
'Well, have a drink,' said Efím. 'I don't want any.'
Elisha stopped.
'You go on,' he said, 'but I'll just run in to the little hut there. I will catch
you up in a moment.'
'All right,' said Efím, and he went on along the high road alone, while
Elisha turned back to the hut.
It was a small hut plastered with clay, the bottom a dark colour, the top
whitewashed; but the clay had crumbled away. Evidently it was long since it had
been re-plastered, and the thatch was off the roof on one side. The entrance to the
hut was through the yard. Elisha entered the yard, and saw, lying close to a bank
of earth that ran round the hut, a gaunt, beardless man with his shirt tucked into
his trousers, as is the custom in Little Russia13. The man must have lain down in
the shade, but the sun had come round and now shone full on him. Though not
asleep, he still lay there. Elisha called to him, and asked for a drink, but the man
gave no answer.
'He is either ill or unfriendly,' thought Elisha; and going to the door he
heard a child crying in the hut. He took hold of the ring that served as a doorhandle, and knocked with it.
'Hey, masters!' he called. No answer. He knocked again with his staff.
'Hey, Christians!' Nothing stirred.
'Hey, servants of God!' Still no reply.
13In Great Russia the peasants let their shirt hang outside their trousers.

65

Elisha was about to turn away, when he thought ho heard a groan the
other side of the door.
'Dear me, some misfortune must have happened to the people? I had
better have a look.'
And Elisha entered the hut.
IV
Elisha turned the ring; the door was not fastened. He opened it and went
along up the narrow passage. The door into the dwelling-room was open. To the
left was a brick oven; in front against the wall was an icon-stand14 and a table
before it, by the table was a bench on which sat an old woman, bareheaded and
wearing only a single garment. There she sat with her head resting on the table,
and near her was a thin, wax-coloured boy, with a protruding stomach. He was
asking for something, pulling at her sleeve, and crying bitterly. Elisha entered.
The air in the hut was very foul. He looked round, and saw a woman lying on
the floor behind the oven: she lay flat on the ground with her eyes closed and her
throat rattling, now stretching out a leg, now dragging it in, tossing from side to
side; and the foul smell came from her. Evidently she could do nothing for
herself and no one had been attending to her needs. The old woman lifted her
head, and saw the stranger.
'What do you want?' said she.' What do you want man? We have nothing.'
Elisha understood her, though she spoke in the Little-Russian dialect.
'I came in for a drink of water, servant of God,' he said.
'There's no one -- no one -- we have nothing to fetch it in. Go your way.'
Then Elisha asked:
'Is there no one among you, then, well enough to attend to that woman?'
'No, we have no one. My son is dying outside, and we are dying in here.'
The little boy had ceased crying when he saw the stranger, but when the
old woman began to speak, he began again, and clutching hold of her sleeve
cried:
'Bread, Granny, bread.'
Elisha was about to question the old woman, when the man staggered into
the hut. He came along the passage, clinging to the wall, but as he was entering
the dwelling-room he fell in the corner near the threshold, and without trying to
get up again to reach the bench, he began to speak in broken words. He brought
out a word at a time, stopping to draw breath, and gasping.
'Illness has seized us . . . ,' said he, 'and famine. He is dying . . . of hunger.'
And he motioned towards the boy, and began to sob.
Elisha jerked up the sack behind his shoulder and pulling the straps off his
arms, put it on the floor. Then he lifted it on to the bench, and untied the strings.
Having opened the sack, he took out a loaf of bread, and, cutting off a piece with
his knife, handed it to the man. The man would not take it, but pointed to the
little boy and to a little girl crouching behind the oven, as if to say:
'Give it to them.'
14An icon (properly ikón) is a representation of God, Christ, an angel, or a saint, usually painted,

enamelled, or embossed.

66

Elisha held it out to the boy. When the boy smelt bread, he stretched out
his arms, and seizing the slice with both his little hands, bit into it so that his nose
disappeared in the chunk. The little girl came out from behind the oven and fixed
her eyes on the bread. Elisha gave her also a slice. Then he cut off another piece
and gave it to the old woman, and she too began munching it.
'If only some water could be brought,' she said, 'their mouths are parched.
I tried to fetch some water yesterday -- or was it to-day -- I can't remember, but I
fell down and could go no further, and the pail has remained there, unless some
one has taken it.'
Elisha asked where the well was. The old woman told him. Elisha went
out, found the pail, brought some water, and gave the people a drink. The
children and the old woman ate some more bread with the water, but the man
would not eat.
'I cannot eat,' he said.
All this time the younger woman did not show any consciousness, but
continued to toss from side to side. Presently Elisha went to the village shop and
bought some millet, salt, flour, and oil. He found an axe, chopped some wood,
and made a fire. The little girl came and helped him. Then he boiled some soup,
and gave the starving people a meal.
V
The man ate a little, the old woman had some too, and the little girl and
boy licked the bowl clean, and then curled up and fell fast asleep in one another's
arms.
The man and the old woman then began telling Elisha how they had sunk
to their present state.
'We were poor enough before?' said they, 'but when the crops failed, what
we gathered hardly lasted us through the autumn. We had nothing left by the
time winter came, and had to beg from the neighbours and from any one we
could. At first they gave, then they began to refuse. Some would have been glad
enough to help us, but had nothing to give. And we were ashamed of asking: we
were in debt all round, and owed money, and flour, and bread.'
'I went to look for work,' the man said, 'but could find none. Everywhere
people were offering to work merely for their own keep. One day you'd get a
short job, and then you might spend two days looking for work. Then the old
woman and the girl went begging, further away. But they got very little; bread
was so scarce. Still we scraped food together somehow, and hoped to struggle
through till next harvest, but towards spring people ceased to give anything.
And then this illness seized us. Things became worse and worse. One day we
might have something to eat, and then nothing for two days. We began eating
grass. Whether it was the grass, or what, made my wife ill, I don't know. She
could not keep on her legs, and I had no strength left, and there was nothing to
help us to recovery.'
'I struggled on alone for a while,' said the old woman, 'but at last I broke
down too for want of food, and grew quite weak. The girl also grew weak and
timid. I told her to go to the neighbours -- she would not leave the hut, but crept
67

into a corner and sat there. The day before yesterday a neighbour looked in, but
seeing that we were ill and hungry she turned away and left us. Her husband has
had to go away, and she has nothing for her own little ones to eat. And so we lay,
waiting for death.'
Having heard their story, Elisha gave up the thought of overtaking his
comrade that day, and remained with them all night. In the morning he got up
and began doing the housework, just as if it were his own home. He kneaded the
bread with the old woman's help, and lit the fire. Then he went with the little girl
to the neighbours to get the most necessary things, for there was nothing in the
hut: everything had been sold for bread -- cooking utensils, clothing, and all. So
Elisha began replacing what was necessary, making some things himself, and
buying some. He remained there one day, then another, and then a third. The
little boy picked up strength and, whenever Elisha sat down, crept along the
bench and nestled up to him. The little girl brightened up and helped in all the
work, running after Elisha and calling,
'Daddy, daddy.'
The old woman grew stronger, and managed to go out to see a neighbour.
The man too improved, and was able to get about, holding on to the wall. Only
the wife could not get up, but even she regained consciousness on the third day,
and asked for food.
'Well,' thought Elisha, 'I never expected to waste so much time on the way.
Now I must be getting on.'
VI
The fourth day was the feast day after the summer fast, and Elisha
thought:
'I will stay and break the fast with these people. I'll go and buy them
something, and keep the feast with them, and to-morrow evening I will start.'
So Elisha went into the village, bought milk, wheat-flour and dripping,
and helped the old woman to boil and bake for the morrow. On the feast day
Elisha went to church, and then broke the fast with his friends at the hut. That
day the wife got up, and managed to move about a bit. The husband had shaved
and put on a clean shirt, which the old woman had washed for him; and he went
to beg for mercy of a rich peasant in the village to whom his ploughland and
meadow were mortgaged. He went to beg the rich peasant to grant him the use
of the meadow and field till after the harvest; but in the evening he came back
very sad, and began to weep. The rich peasant had shown no mercy, but had
said: 'Bring me the money.'
Elisha again grew thoughtful. 'How are they to live now?' thought he to
himself. 'Other people will go haymaking, but there will be nothing for these to
mow, their grass land is mortgaged. The rye will ripen. Others will reap (and
what a fine crop mother-earth is giving this year), but they have nothing to look
forward to. Their three acres are pledged to the rich peasant. When I am gone,
they'll drift back into the state I found them in.'
Elisha was in two minds, but finally decided not to leave that evening, but
to wait until the morrow. He went out into the yard to sleep. He said his prayers,
68

and lay down; but he could not sleep. On the one hand he felt he ought to be
going, for he had spent too much time and money as it was; on the other hand he
felt sorry for the people.
'There seems to be no end to it, he said. 'First I only meant to bring them a
little water and give them each a slice of bread: and just see where it has landed
me. It's a case of redeeming the meadow and the cornfield. And when I have
done that, I shall have to buy a cow for them, and a horse for the man to cart his
sheaves. A nice coil you've got yourself into, brother Elisha! You've slipped your
cables and lost your reckoning!'
Elisha got up, lifted his coat which he had been using for a pillow,
unfolded it, got out his snuff-box and took a pinch, thinking that it might
perhaps clear his thoughts.
But no! He thought and thought, and came to no conclusion. He ought to
be going; and yet pity held him back. He did not know what to do. He refolded
his coat and put it under his head again. He lay thus for a long time, till the cocks
had already crowed once: then he was quite drowsy. And suddenly it seemed as
if some one had roused him. He saw that he was dressed for the journey, with
the sack on his back and the staff in his hand, and the gate stood ajar so that he
could just squeeze through. He was about to pass out, when his sack caught
against the fence on one side: he tried to free it, but then his leg-band caught on
the other side and came undone. He pulled at the sack, and saw that it had not
caught on the fence, but that the little girl was holding it and crying,
'Bread, daddy, bread!'
He looked at his foot, and there was the tiny boy holding him by the legband, while the master of the hut and the old woman were looking at him
through the window.
Elisha awoke, and said to himself in an audible voice:
'To-morrow I will redeem their cornfield, and will buy them a horse, and
flour to last till the harvest, and a cow for the little ones; or else while I go to seek
the Lord beyond the sea, I may lose Him in myself.'
Then Elisha fell asleep, and slept till morning. He awoke early, and going
to the rich peasant, redeemed both the cornfield and the meadow land. He
bought a scythe (for that also had been sold) and brought it back with him. Then
he sent the man to mow, and himself went into the village. He heard that there
was a horse and cart for sale at the public-house, and he struck a bargain with the
owner, and bought them. Then he bought a sack of flour, put it in the cart, and
went to see about a cow. As he was going along he overtook two women talking
as they went. Though they spake the Little-Russian dialect, he understood what
they were saying.
'At first, it seems, they did not know him; they thought he was just an
ordinary man. He came in to ask for a drink of water, and then he remained. Just
think of the things he has bought for them! Why they say he bought a horse and
cart for them at the publican's, only this morning! There are not many such men
in the world. It's worth while going to have a look at him.'
Elisha heard and understood that he was being praised, and he did not go
to buy the cow, but returned to the inn, paid for the horse, harnessed it, drove up
to the hut, and got out. The people in the hut were astonished when they saw the
69

horse. They thought it might be for them, but dared not ask. The man came out
to open the gate.
'Where did you get a horse from, grandfather,' he asked.
'Why, I bought it,' said Elisha. 'It was going cheap. Go and cut some grass
and put it in the manger for it to eat during the night. And take in the sack.'
The man unharnessed the horse, and carried the sack into the barn. Then
he mowed some grass and put it in the manger. Everybody lay down to sleep.
Elisha went outside and lay by the roadside. That evening he took his bag out
with him. When every one was asleep, he got up, packed and fastened his bag,
wrapped the linen bands round his legs, put on his shoes and coat, and set off to
follow Efím.
VII
When Elisha had walked rather more than three miles it began to grow
light. He sat down under a tree, opened his bag, counted his money, and found
he had only seventeen roubles and twenty kopeks left.
'Well,' thought he, 'it is no use trying to cross the sea with this. If I beg my
way it may be worse than not going at all. Friend Efím will get to Jerusalem
without me, and will place a candle at the shrines in my name. As for me, I'm
afraid I shall never fulfil my vow in this life. I must be thankful it was made to a
merciful Master, and to one who pardons sinners.'
Elisha rose, jerked his bag well up on his shoulders, and turned back. Not
wishing to be recognized by any one, he made a circuit to avoid the village, and
walked briskly homeward. Coming from home the way had seemed difficult to
him, and he had found it hard to keep up with Efím, but now on his return
journey, God helped him to get over the ground so that he hardly felt fatigue.
Walking seemed like child's play. He went along swinging his staff, and did his
forty to fifty miles a day.
When Elisha reached home the harvest was over. His family were
delighted to see him again, and all wanted to know what had happened: Why
and how he had been left behind? And why he had returned without reaching
Jerusalem? But Elisha did not tell them.
'It was not God's will that I should get there,' said he. 'I lost my money on
the way, and lagged behind my companion. Forgive me, for the Lord's sake!'
Elisha gave his old wife what money he had left. Then he questioned them
about home affairs. Everything was going on well; all the work had been done,
nothing neglected, and all were living in peace and concord.
Efím's family heard of his return the same day, and came for news of their
old man; and to them Elisha gave the same answers.
'Efím is a fast walker. We parted three days before St. Peter's day, and I
meant to catch him up again, but all sorts of things happened. I lost my money,
and had no means to get any further, so I turned back.'
The folks were astonished that so sensible a man should have acted so
foolishly: should have started and not got to his destination, and should have
squandered all his money. They wondered at it for a while, and then forgot all
about it, and Elisha forgot it too. He set to work again on his homestead. With his
70

son's help he cut wood for fuel for the winter. He and the women threshed the
corn. Then he mended the thatch on the outhouses, put the bees under cover, and
handed over to his neighbour the ten hives he had sold him in spring, and all the
swarms that had come from them. His wife tried not to tell how many swarms
there had been from these hives, but Elisha knew well enough from which there
had been swarms and from which not. And instead of ten, he handed over
seventeen swarms to his neighbour. Having got everything ready for the winter,
Elisha sent his son away to find work, while he himself took to platting shoes of
bark, and hollowing out logs for hives.
VIII
All that day while Elisha stopped behind in the hut with the sick people,
Efím waited for him. He only went on a little way before he sat down. He waited
and waited, had a nap, woke up again, and again sat waiting; but his comrade
did not come. He gazed till his eyes ached. The sun was already sinking behind a
tree, and still no Elisha was to be seen.
'Perhaps he has passed me,' thought Efím, 'or perhaps some one gave him
a lift and he drove by while I slept, and did not see me. But how could he help
seeing me? One can see so far here in the steppe. Shall I go back? Suppose he is
on in front, we shall then miss each other completely and it will be still worse. I
had better go on, and we shall be sure to meet where we put up for the night.'
He came to a village, and told the watchman, if an old man of a certain
description came along, to bring him to the hut where Efím stopped. But Elisha
did not turn up that night. Efím went on, asking all he met whether they had not
seen a little, bald-headed, old man? No one had seen such a traveller. Efím
wondered, but went on alone, saying:
'We shall be sure to meet in Odessa, or on board the ship,' and he did not
trouble more about it.
On the way, he came across a pilgrim wearing a priest's coat, with long
hair and a skull-cap such as priests wear. This pilgrim had been to Mount Athos,
and was now going to Jerusalem for the second time. They both stopped at the
same place one night, and, having met, they travelled on together.
They got safely to Odessa, and there had to wait three days for a ship.
Many pilgrims from many different parts were in the same case. Again Efím
asked about Elisha, but no one had seen him.
Efím got himself a foreign passport, which cost him five roubles. He paid
forty roubles for a return ticket to Jerusalem, and bought a supply of bread and
herrings for the voyage.
The pilgrim began explaining to Efím how he might get on to the ship
without paying his fare; but Efím would not listen. 'No, I came prepared to pay,
and I shall pay,' said he.
The ship was freighted, and the pilgrims went on board, Efím and his new
comrade among them. The anchors were weighed, and the ship put out to sea.
All day they sailed smoothly, but towards night a wind arose, rain came
on, and the vessel tossed about and shipped water. The people were frightened:
the women wailed and screamed, and some of the weaker men ran about the
71

ship looking for shelter. Efím too was frightened, but he would not show it, and
remained at the place on deck where he had settled down when first he came on
board, beside some old men from Tambóf. There they sat silent, all night and all
next day, holding on to their sacks. On the third day it grew calm, and on the
fifth day they anchored at Constantinople. Some of the pilgrims went on shore to
visit the Church of St. Sophia, now held by the Turks. Efím remained on the ship,
and only bought some white bread. They lay there for twenty-four hours, and
then put to sea again. At Smyrna they stopped again; and at Alexandria; but at
last they arrived safely at Jaffa, where all the pilgrims had to disembark. From
there still it was more than forty miles by road to Jerusalem. When disembarking
the people were again much frightened. The ship was high, and the people were
dropped into boats, which rocked so much that it was easy to miss them and fall
into the water. A couple of men did get a wetting, but at last all were safely
landed.
They went on on foot, and at noon on the third day reached Jerusalem.
They stopped outside the town, at the Russian inn, where their passports were
indorsed. Then, after dinner, Efím visited the Holy Places with his companion,
the pilgrim. It was not the time when they could be admitted to the Holy
Sepulchre, but they went to the Patriarchate. All the pilgrims assembled there.
The women were separated from the men, who were all told to sit in a circle,
barefoot. Then a monk came in with a towel to wash their feet. He washed,
wiped, and then kissed their feet, and did this to every one in the circle. Efím's
feet were washed and kissed, with the rest. He stood through vespers and
matins, prayed, placed candles at the shrines, handed in booklets inscribed with
his parents, names, that they might be mentioned in the church prayers. Here at
the Patriarchate food and wine were given them. Next morning they went to the
cell of Mary of Egypt, where she had lived doing penance. Here too they placed
candles and had prayers read. From there they went to Abraham's Monastery,
and saw the place where Abraham intended to slay his son as an offering to God.
Then they visited the spot where Christ appeared to Mary Magdalene, and the
Church of James, the Lord's brother. The pilgrim showed Efím all these places,
and told him how much money to give at each place. At mid-day they returned
to the inn and had dinner. As they were preparing to lie down and rest, the
pilgrim cried out, and began to search his clothes, feeling them all over.
'My purse has been stolen, there were twenty-three roubles in it,' said he,
'two ten-rouble notes and the rest in change.'
He sighed and lamented a great deal, but as there was no help for it, they
lay down to sleep.
IX
As Efím lay there, he was assailed by temptation.
'No one has stolen any money from this pilgrim,' thought he, 'I do not
believe he had any. He gave none away anywhere, though he made me give, and
even borrowed a rouble of me.'
This thought had no sooner crossed his mind, than Efím rebuked himself,
saying: 'What right have I to judge a man? It is a sin. I will think no more about
72

it.' But as soon as his thoughts began to wander, they turned again to the pilgrim:
how interested he seemed to be in money, and how unlikely it sounded when he
declared that his purse had been stolen.
'He never had any money,' thought Efím. 'It's all an invention.'
Towards evening they got up, and went to midnight Mass at the great
Church of the Resurrection, where the Lord's Sepulchre is. The pilgrim kept close
to Efím and went with him everywhere. They came to the Church; a great many
pilgrims were there; some Russians and some of other nationalities: Greeks,
Armenians, Turks, and Syrians. Efím entered the Holy Gates with the crowd. A
monk led them past the Turkish sentinels, to the place where the Saviour was
taken down from the cross and anointed, and where candles were burning in
nine great candlesticks. The monk showed and explained everything. Efím
offered a candle there. Then the monk led Efím to the right, up the steps to
Golgotha, to the place where the cross had stood. Efím prayed there. Then they
showed him the cleft where the ground had been rent asunder to its nethermost
depths; then the place where Christ's hands and feet were nailed to the cross;
then Adam's tomb, where the blood of Christ had dripped on to Adam's bones.
Then they showed him the stone on which Christ sat when the crown of thorns
was placed on His head; then the post to which Christ was bound when He was
scourged. Then Efím saw the stone with two holes for Christ's feet. They were
going to show him something else, but there was a stir in the crowd, and the
people all hurried to the church of the Lord's Sepulchre itself. The Latin Mass
had just finished there, and the Russian Mass was beginning. And Efím went
with the crowd to the tomb cut in the rock.
He tried to get rid of the pilgrim, against whom he was still sinning in his
mind, but the pilgrim would not leave him, but went with him to the Mass at the
Holy Sepulchre. They tried to get to the front, but were too late. There was such a
crowd that it was impossible to move either backwards or forwards. Efím stood
looking in front of him, praying, and every now and then feeling for his purse.
He was in two minds: sometimes he thought that the pilgrim was deceiving him,
and then again he thought that if the pilgrim spoke the truth and his purse had
really been stolen, the same thing might happen to himself.
X
Efím stood there gazing into the little chapel in which was the Holy
Sepulchre itself with thirty-six lamps burning above it. As he stood looking over
the people's heads, he saw something that surprised him. Just beneath the lamps
in which the sacred fire burns and in front of every one, Efím saw an old man in
a grey coat, whose bald, shining head was just like Elisha Bódrof.
'It is like him,' thought Efím, 'but it cannot be Elisha. He could not have
got ahead of me. The ship before ours started a week sooner. He could not have
caught that; and he was not on ours, for I saw every pilgrim on board.'
Hardly had Efím thought this, when the little old man began to pray, and
bowed three times: once forwards to God, then once on each side -- to the
brethren. And as he turned his head to the right, Efím recognized him. It was
73

Elisha Bódrof himself with his dark, curly beard turning grey at the cheeks, with
his brows, his eyes and nose, and his expression of face. Yes, it was he!
Efím was very pleased to have found his comrade again, and wondered
how Elisha had got ahead of him.
'Well done, Elisha!' thought he. 'See how he has pushed ahead. He must
have come across some one who showed him the way. When we get out, I will
find him, get rid of this fellow in the skull-cap, and keep to Elisha. Perhaps he
will show me how to get to the front also.'
Efím kept looking out, so as not to lose sight of Elisha. But when the Mass
was over, the crowd began to sway, pushing forward to kiss the tomb, and
pushed Efím aside. He was again seized with fear lest his purse should be stolen.
Pressing it with his hand, he began elbowing through the crowd, anxious only to
get out. When he reached the open, he went about for a long time searching for
Elisha both outside and in the Church itself. In the cells of the Church he saw
many people of all kinds, eating, and drinking wine, and reading and sleeping
there. But Elisha was nowhere to be seen. So Efím returned to the inn without
having found his comrade. That evening the pilgrim in the skull-cap did not turn
up. He had gone off without repaying the rouble, and Efím was left alone.
The next day Efím went to the Holy Sepulchre again, with an old man
from Tambóf, whom he had met on the ship. He tried to get to the front, but was
again pressed back; so he stood by a pillar and prayed. He looked before him,
and there in the foremost place under the lamps, close to the very Sepulchre of
the Lord, stood Elisha, with his arms spread out like a priest at the altar, and
with his bald head all shining.
'Well, now,' thought Efím, 'I won't lose him!'
He pushed forward to the front, but when he got there, there was no
Elisha: he had evidently gone away.
Again on the third day Efím looked, and saw at the Sepulchre, in the
holiest place, Elisha standing in the sight of all men, his arms outspread, and his
eyes gazing upwards as if he saw something above. And his bald head was all
shining.
'Well, this time,' thought Efím, 'he shall not escape me! I will go and stand
at the door, then we can't miss one another!'
Efím went out and stood by the door till past noon. Every one had passed
out, but still Elisha did not appear.
Efím remained six weeks in Jerusalem, and went everywhere: to
Bethlehem, and to Bethany, and to the Jordan. He had a new shirt sealed at the
Holy Sepulchre for his burial, and he took a bottle of water from the Jordan, and
some holy earth, and bought candles that had been lit at the sacred flame. In
eight places he inscribed names to be prayed for, and he spent all his money,
except just enough to get home with. Then he started homeward. He walked to
Jaffa, sailed thence to Odessa, and walked home from there on foot.
XI
Efím travelled the same road he had come by; and as he drew nearer
home his former anxiety returned as to how affairs were getting on in his
74

absence. 'Much water flows away in a year,' the proverb says. It takes a lifetime
to build up a homestead, but not long to ruin it, thought he. And he wondered
how his son had managed without him, what sort of spring they were having,
how the cattle had wintered, and whether the cottage was well finished. When
Efím came to the district where he had parted from Elisha the summer before, he
could hardly believe that the people living there were the same. The year before
they had been starving, but now they were living in comfort. The harvest had
been good, and the people had recovered and had forgotten their former misery.
One evening Efím reached the very place where Elisha had remained
behind; and as he entered the village, a little girl in a white smock ran out of a
hut.
Daddy, daddy, come to our house!'
Efím meant to pass on, but the little girl would not let him. She took hold
of his coat, laughing, and pulled him towards the hut, where a woman with a
small boy came out into the porch and beckoned to him.
'Come in, grandfather,' she said. 'Have supper and spend the night with
us.'
So Efím went in.
'I may as well ask about Elisha,' he thought. 'I fancy this is the very hut he
went to for a drink of water.'
The woman helped him off with the bag he carried, and gave him water to
wash his face. Then she made him sit down to table, and set milk, curd-cakes and
porridge before him. Efím thanked her, and praised her for her kindness to a
pilgrim. The woman shook her head.
'We have good reason to welcome pilgrims,' she said. 'It was a pilgrim
who showed us what life is. We were living forgetful of God, and God punished
us almost to death. We reached such a pass last summer, that we all lay ill and
helpless with nothing to eat. And we should have died, but that God sent an old
man to help us -- just such a one as you. He came in one day to ask for a drink of
water, saw the state we were in, took pity on us, and remained with us. He gave
us food and drink, and set us on our feet again; and he redeemed our land, and
bought a cart and horse and gave them to us.'
Here the old woman entering the hut, interrupted the younger one and
said:
'We don't know whether it was a man, or an angel from God. He loved us
all, pitied us all, and went away without telling us his name, so that we don't
even know whom to pray for. I can see it all before me now! There I lay waiting
for death, when in comes a bald-headed old man. He was not anything much to
look at, and he asked for a drink of water. I, sinner that I am, thought to myself:
"What does he come prowling about here for?" And just think what he did! As
soon as he saw us, he let down his bag, on this very spot, and untied it.'
Here the little girl joined in.
'No, Granny,' said she, 'first he put it down here in the middle of the hut,
and then he lifted it on to the bench.'
And they began discussing and recalling all he had said and done, where
he sat and slept, and what he had said to each of them.
75

At night the peasant himself came home on his horse, and he too began to
tell about Elisha and how he had lived with them.
'Had he not come we should all have died in our sins. We were dying in
despair, murmuring against God and man. But he set us on our feet again; and
through him we learned to know God, and to believe that there is good in man.
May the Lord bless him! We used to live like animals; he made human beings of
us.
After giving Efím food and drink, they showed him where he was to
sleep; and lay down to sleep themselves.
But though Efím lay down, he could not sleep. He could not get Elisha out
of his mind, but remembered how he had seen him three times at Jerusalem,
standing in the foremost place.
'So that is how he got ahead of me,' thought Efím. 'God may or may not
have accepted my pilgrimage but He has certainly accepted his!'
Next morning Efím bade farewell to the people, who put some patties in
his sack before they went to their work, and he continued his journey.
XII
Efím had been away just a year, and it was spring again when he reached
home one evening. His son was not at home, but had gone to the public-house
and when he came back, he had had a drop too much. Efím began questioning
him. Everything showed that the young fellow had been unsteady during his
father's absence. The money had all been wrongly spent, and the work had been
neglected. The father began to upbraid the son; and the son answered rudely.
'Why didn't you stay and look after it yourself?' he said. 'You go off,
taking the money with you and now you demand it of me!'
The old man grew angry, and struck his son.
In the morning Efím went to the village Elder to complain of his son's
conduct. As he was passing Elisha's house, his friend's wife greeted him from the
porch.
'How do you do, neighbour,' she said. 'How do you do, dear friend? Did
you get to Jerusalem safely?'
Efím stopped.
'Yes, thank God,' he said. 'I have been there. I lost sight of your old man,
but I hear he got home safely.'
The old woman was fond of talking:
'Yes, neighbour, he has come back,' said she. 'He's been back a long time.
Soon after Assumption, I think it was, he returned. And we were glad the Lord
had sent him back to us! We were dull without him. We can't expect much work
from him any more, his years for work are past; but still he is the head of the
household and it's more cheerful when he's at home. And how glad our lad was!
He said, "It's like being without sunlight, when father's away!" It was dull
without him, dear friend. We're fond of him, and take good care of him.'
'Is he at home now?'
'He is, dear friend. He is with his bees. He is hiving the swarms. He says
they are swarming well this year. The Lord has given such strength to the bees
76

that my husband doesn't remember the like. "The Lord is not rewarding us
according to our sins," he says. Come in, dear neighbour, he will be so glad to see
you again.'
Efím passed through the passage into the yard and to the apiary, to see
Elisha. There was Elisha in his grey coat, without any face-net or gloves,
standing, under the birch trees, looking upwards, his arms stretched out and his
bald head shining, as Efím had seen him at the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem: and
above him the sunlight shone through the birches as the flames of fire had done
in the holy place, and the golden bees flew round his head like a halo, and did
not sting him.
Efím stopped. The old woman called to her husband.
'Here's your friend come,' she cried.
Elisha looked round with a pleased face, and came towards Efím, gently
picking bees out of his own beard.
'Good day, neighbour, good-day, dear friend. Did you get there safely?'
'My feet walked there, and I have brought you some water from the river
Jordan. You must come to my house for it. But whether the Lord accepted my
efforts. . . .'
'Well the Lord be thanked! May Christ bless you!' said Elisha.
Efím was silent for a while, and then added:
'My feet have been there, but whether my soul, or another's, has been
there more truly . . .'
'That's God's business, neighbour, God's business,' interrupted Elisha.
'On my return journey I stopped at the hut where you remained behind. . .
.'
Elisha was alarmed, and said hurriedly:
'God's business, neighbour, God's business! Come into the cottage, I'll give
you some of our honey.' And Elisha changed the conversation, and talked of
home affairs.
Efím sighed, and did not speak to Elisha of the people in the hut, nor of
how he had seen him in Jerusalem. But he now understood that the best way to
keep one's vows to God and to do His will, is for each man while he lives to show
love and do good to others.
1885.

77

7

WHERE LOVE IS, GOD IS
IN a certain town there lived a cobbler, Martin Avdéiteh by name. He had a tiny
room in a basement, the one window of which looked out on to the street.
Through it one could only see the feet of those who passed by, but Martin
recognized the people by their boots. He had lived long in the place and had
many acquaintances. There was hardly a pair of boots in the neighbourhood that
had not been once or twice through his hands, so he often saw his own
handiwork through the window. Some he had re-soled, some patched, some
stitched up, and to some he had even put fresh uppers. He had plenty to do, for
he worked well, used good material, did not charge too much, and could be
relied on. If he could do a job by the day required, he undertook it; if not, he told
the truth and gave no false promises; so he was well known and never short of
work.
Martin had always been a good man; but in his old age he began to think
more about his soul and to draw nearer to God. While he still worked for a
master, before he set up on his own account, his wife had died, leaving him with
a three-year old son. None of his elder children had lived, they had all died in
infancy. At first Martin thought of sending his little son to his sister's in the
country, but then he felt sorry to part with the boy, thinking: 'It would be hard
for my little Kapitón to have to grow up in a strange family; I will keep him with
me.'
Martin left his master and went into lodgings with his little son. But he
had no luck with his children. No sooner had the boy reached an age when he
could help his father and be a support as well as a joy to him, than he fell ill and,
after being laid up for a week with a burning fever, died. Martin buried his son,
and gave way to despair so great and overwhelming that he murmured against
God. In his sorrow he prayed again and again that he too might die, reproaching
God for having taken the son he loved, his only son while he, old as he was,
remained alive. After that Martin left off going to church.
One day an old man from Martin's native village who had been a pilgrim
for the last eight years, called in on his way from Tróitsa Monastery. Martin
opened his heart to him, and told him of his sorrow.
'I no longer even wish to live, holy man,' he said. 'All I ask of God is that I
soon may die. I am now quite without hope in the world.'
The old man replied: 'You have no right to say such things, Martin. We
cannot judge God's ways. Not our reasoning, but God's will, decides. If God
willed that your son should die and you should live, it must be best so. As to
your despair -- that comes because you wish to live for your own happiness.'
'What else should one live for?' asked Martin.
'For God, Martin,' said the old man. 'He gives you life, and you must live
for Him. When you have learnt to live for Him, you will grieve no more, and all
will seem easy to you.'
Martin was silent awhile, and then asked: 'But how is one to live for God?'
78

The old man answered: 'How one may live for God has been shown us by
Christ. Can you read? Then buy the Gospels, and read them: there you will see
how God would have you live. You have it all there.'
These words sank deep into Martin's heart, and that same day he went
and bought himself a Testament in large print, and began to read.
At first he meant only to read on holidays, but having once begun he
found it made his heart so light that he read every day. Sometimes he was so
absorbed in his reading that the oil in his lamp burnt out before he could tear
himself away from the book. He continued to read every night, and the more he
read the more clearly he understood what God required of him, and how he
might live for God. And his heart grew lighter and lighter. Before, when he went
to bed he used to lie with a heavy heart, moaning as he thought of his little
Kapitón; but now he only repeated again and again: 'Glory to Thee, glory to
Thee, O Lord! Thy will be done!'
From that time Martin's whole life changed. Formerly, on holidays he
used to go and have tea at the public house, and did not even refuse a glass or
two of vódka. Sometimes, after having had a drop with a friend, he left the public
house not drunk, but rather merry, and would say foolish things: shout at a man,
or abuse him. Now, all that sort of thing passed away from him. His life became
peaceful and joyful. He sat down to his work in the morning, and when he had
finished his day's work he took the lamp down from the wall, stood it on the
table, fetched his book from the shelf, opened it, and sat down to read. The more
he read the better he understood, and the clearer and happier he felt in his mind.
It happened once that Martin sat up late, absorbed in his book. He was
reading Luke's Gospel; and in the sixth chapter he came upon the verses:
'To him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the other; and from
him that taketh away thy cloke withhold not thy coat also. Give to every man
that asketh thee; and of him that taketh away thy goods ask them not again. And
as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise.'
He also read the verses where our Lord says:
'And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth them, I will shew
you to whom he is like: He is like a man which built an house, and digged deep,
and laid the foundation on a rock: and when the flood arose, the stream beat
vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a
rock. But he that heareth and doeth not, is like a man that without a foundation
built an house upon the earth, against which the stream did beat vehemently,
and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house was great.'
When Martin read these words his soul was glad within him. He took off
his spectacles and laid them on the book, and leaning his elbows on the table
pondered over what he had read. He tried his own life by the standard of those
words, asking himself:
'Is my house built on the rock, or on sand? If it stands on the rock, it is
well. It seems easy enough while one sits here alone, and one thinks one has
done all that God commands; but as soon as I cease to be on my guard, I sin
again. Still I will persevere. It brings such joy. Help me, O Lord!'
79

He thought all this, and was about to go to bed, but was loth to leave his
book. So he went on reading the seventh chapter -- about the centurion, the
widow's son, and the answer to John's disciples -- and he came to the part where
a rich Pharisee invited the Lord to his house; and he read how the woman who
was a sinner, anointed his feet and washed them with her tears, and how he
justified her. Coming to the forty-fourth verse, he read:
'And turning to the woman, he said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I
entered into thine house thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath
wetted my feet with her tears, and wiped them with her hair. Thou gavest me no
kiss; but she, since the time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head
with oil thou didst not anoint: but she hath anointed my feet with ointment.'
He read these verses and thought: 'He gave no water for his feet, gave no
kiss, his head with oil he did not anoint. . . .' And Martin took off his spectacles
once more, laid them on his book, and pondered.
'He must have been like me, that Pharisee. He too thought only of himself
-- how to get a cup of tea, how to keep warm and comfortable; never a thought of
his guest. He took care of himself, but for his guest he cared nothing at all. Yet
who was the guest? The Lord himself! If he came to me, should I behave like
that?'
Then Martin laid his head upon both his arms and, before he was aware of
it, he fell asleep.
'Martin!' he suddenly heard a voice, as if some one had breathed the word
above his ear.
He started from his sleep. 'Who's there?' he asked.
He turned round and looked at the door; no one was there. He called
again. Then he heard quite distinctly: 'Martin, Martin! Look out into the street tomorrow, for I shall come.'
Martin roused himself, rose from his chair and rubbed his eyes, but did
not know whether he had heard these words in a dream or awake. He put out
the lamp and lay down to sleep.
Next morning he rose before daylight, and after saying his prayers he lit
the fire and prepared his cabbage soup and buckwheat porridge. Then he lit the
samovár, put on his apron, and sat down by the window to his work. As he sat
working Martin thought over what had happened the night before. At times it
seemed to him like a dream, and at times he thought that he had really heard the
voice. 'Such things have happened before now,' thought he.
So he sat by the window, looking out into the street more than he worked,
and whenever any one passed in unfamiliar boots he would stoop and look up,
so as to see not the feet only but the face of the passer-by as well. A house-porter
passed in new felt boots; then a water-carrier. Presently an old soldier of
Nicholas' reign came near the window spade in hand. Martin knew him by his
boots, which were shabby old felt ones, goloshed with leather. The old man was
called Stepániteh: a neighbouring tradesman kept him in his house for charity,
and his duty was to help the house-porter. He began to clear away the snow
before Martin's window. Martin glanced at him and then went on with his work.

80

'I must be growing crazy with age,' said Martin, laughing at his fancy.
'Stepánitch comes to clear away the snow, and I must needs imagine it's Christ
coming to visit me. Old dotard that I am!'
Yet after he had made a dozen stitches he felt drawn to look out of the
window again. He saw that Stepánitch had leaned his spade against the wall,
and was either resting himself or trying to get warm. The man was old and
broken down, and had evidently not enough strength even to clear away the
snow.
'What if I called him in and gave him some tea?' thought Martin. 'The
samovár is just on the boil.'
He stuck his awl in its place, and rose; and putting the samovár on the
table, made tea. Then he tapped the window with his fingers. Stepánitch turned
and came to the window. Martin beckoned to him to come in, and went himself
to open the door.
'Come in,' he said, 'and warm yourself a bit. I'm sure you must be cold.'
'May God bless you!' Stepánitch answered. 'My bones do ache to be sure.'
He came in, first shaking off the snow, and lest he should leave marks on the
floor he began wiping his feet; but as he did so he tottered and nearly fell.
'Don't trouble to wipe your feet,' said Martin 'I'll wipe up the floor -- it's all
in the day's work. Come, friend, sit down and have some tea.'
Filling two tumblers, he passed one to his visitor, and pouring his own out
into the saucer, began to blow on it.
Stepániteh emptied his glass, and, turning it upside down, put the remains
of his piece of sugar on the top. He began to express his thanks, but it was plain
that he would be glad of some more.
'Have another glass,' said Martin, refilling the visitor's tumbler and his
own. But while he drank his tea Martin kept looking out into the street.
'Are you expecting any one?' asked the visitor.
'Am I expecting any one? Well, now, I'm ashamed to tell you. It isn't that I
really expect any one; but I heard something last night which I can't get out of
my mind Whether it was a vision, or only a fancy, I can't tell. You see, friend, last
night I was reading the Gospel, about Christ the Lord, how he suffered, and how
he walked on earth. You have heard tell of it, I dare say.'
'I have heard tell of it,' answered Stepánitch; 'but I'm an ignorant man and
not able to read.'
'Well, you see, I was reading of how he walked on earth. I came to that
part, you know, where he went to a Pharisee who did not receive him well. Well,
friend, as I read about it, I thought now that man did not receive Christ the Lord
with proper honour. Suppose such a thing could happen to such a man as
myself, I thought, what would I not do to receive him! But that man gave him no
reception at all. Well, friend, as I was thinking of this, I began to doze, and as I
dozed I heard some one call me by name. I got up, and thought I heard some one
whispering, "Expect me; I will come to-morrow." This happened twice over. And
to tell you the truth, it sank so into my mind that, though I am ashamed of it
myself, I keep on expecting him, the dear Lord!'
Stepánitch shook his head in silence, finished his tumbler and laid it on its
side; but Martin stood it up again and refilled it for him.
81

'Here drink another glass, bless you! And I was thinking too, how he
walked on earth and despised no one, but went mostly among common folk. He
went with plain people, and chose his disciples from among the likes of us, from
workmen like us, sinners that we are. "He who raises himself," he said, "shall be
humbled and he who humbles himself shall be raised." "You call me Lord," he
said, "and I will wash your feet." "He who would be first," he said, "let him be the
servant of all; because," he said, "blessed are the poor, the humble, the meek, and
the merciful."'
Stepánitch forgot his tea. He was an old man easily moved to tears, and as
he sat and listened the tears ran down his cheeks.
'Come, drink some more,' said Martin. But Stepánitch crossed himself,
thanked him, moved away his tumbler, and rose.
'Thank you, Martin Avdéitch,' he said, 'you have given me food and
comfort both for soul and body.'
'You're very welcome. Come again another time. I am glad to have a
guest,' said Martin.
Stepánitch went away; and Martin poured out the last of the tea and drank
it up. Then he put away the tea things and sat down to his work, stitching the
back seam of a boot. And as he stitched he kept looking out of the window,
waiting for Christ, and thinking about him and his doings. And his head was full
of Christ's sayings.
Two soldiers went by: one in Government boots the other in boots of his
own; then the master of a neighbouring house, in shining goloshes; then a baker
carrying a basket. All these passed on. Then a woman came up in worsted
stockings and peasant-made shoes. She passed the window, but stopped by the
wall. Martin glanced up at her through the window, and saw that she was a
stranger, poorly dressed, and with a baby in her arms. She stopped by the wall
with her back to the wind, trying to wrap the baby up though she had hardly
anything to wrap it in. The woman had only summer clothes on, and even they
were shabby and worn. Through the window Martin heard the baby crying, and
the woman trying to soothe it, but unable to do so. Martin rose and going out of
the door and up the steps he called to her.
'My dear, I say, my dear!'
The woman heard, and turned round.
'Why do you stand out there with the baby in the cold? Come inside. You
can wrap him up better in a warm place. Come this way!'
The woman was surprised to see an old man in an apron, with spectacles
on his nose, calling to her, but she followed him in.
They went down the steps, entered the little room, and the old man led
her to the bed.
'There, sit down, my dear, near the stove. Warm yourself, and feed the
baby.'
'Haven't any milk. I have eaten nothing myself since early morning,' said
the woman, but still she took the baby to her breast.
Martin shook his head. He brought out a basin and some bread. Then he
opened the oven door and poured some cabbage soup into the basin. He took out
82

the porridge pot also but the porridge was not yet ready, so he spread a cloth on
the table and served only the soup and bread.
'Sit down and eat, my dear, and I'll mind the baby. Why, bless me, I've had
children of my own; I know how to manage them.'
The woman crossed herself, and sitting down at the table began to eat,
while Martin put the baby on the bed and sat down by it. He chucked and
chucked, but having no teeth he could not do it well and the baby continued to
cry. Then Martin tried poking at him with his finger; he drove his finger straight
at the baby's mouth and then quickly drew it back, and did this again and again.
He did not let the baby take his finger in its mouth, because it was all black with
cobbler's wax. But the baby first grew quiet watching the finger, and then began
to laugh. And Martin felt quite pleased.
The woman sat eating and talking, and told him who she was, and where
she had been.
'I'm a soldier's wife,' said she. 'They sent my husband somewhere, far
away, eight months ago, and I have heard nothing of him since. I had a place as
cook till my baby was born, but then they would not keep me with a child. For
three months now I have been struggling, unable to find a place, and I've had to
sell all I had for food. I tried to go as a wet-nurse, but no one would have me;
they said I was too starved-looking and thin. Now I have just been to see a
tradesman's wife (a woman from our village is in service with her) and she has
promised to take me. I thought it was all settled at last, but she tells me not to
come till next week. It is far to her place, and I am fagged out, and baby is quite
starved, poor mite. Fortunately our landlady has pity on us, and lets us lodge
free, else I don't know what we should do.'
Martin sighed. 'Haven't you any warmer clothing?' he asked.
'How could I get warm clothing?' said she. 'Why I pawned my last shawl
for sixpence yesterday.'
Then the woman came and took the child, and Martin got up. He went
and looked among some things that were hanging on the wall, and brought back
an old cloak.
'Here,' he said, 'though it's a worn-out old thing, it will do to wrap him up
in.'
The woman looked at the cloak, then at the old man, and taking it, burst
into tears. Martin turned away, and groping under the bed brought out a small
trunk. He fumbled about in it, and again sat down opposite the woman. And the
woman said:
'The Lord bless you, friend. Surely Christ must have sent me to your
window, else the child would have frozen. It was mild when I started, but now
see how cold it has turned. Surely it must have been Christ who made you look
out of your window and take pity on me, poor wretch!'
Martin smiled and said; 'It is quite true; it was he made me do it. It was no
mere chance made me look out.'
And he told the woman his dream, and how he had heard the Lord's voice
promising to visit him that day.

83

'Who knows? All things are possible,' said the woman. And she got up
and threw the cloak over her shoulders, wrapping it round herself and round the
baby. Then she bowed, and thanked Martin once more.
'Take this for Christ's sake,' said Martin, and gave her sixpence to get her
shawl out of pawn. The woman crossed herself, and Martin did the same, and
then he saw her out.
After the woman had gone, Martin ate some cabbage soup, cleared the
things away, and sat down to work again. He sat and worked, but did not forget
the window, and every time a shadow fell on it he looked up at once to see who
was passing. People he knew and strangers passed by, but no one remarkable.
After a while Martin saw an apple-woman stop just in front of his
window. She had a large basket, but there did not seem to be many apples left in
it; she had evidently sold most of her stock. On her back she had a sack full of
chips, which she was taking home. No doubt she had gathered them at some
place where building was going on. The sack evidently hurt her, and she wanted
to shift it from one shoulder to the other, so she put it down on the footpath and,
placing her basket on a post, began to shake down the chips in the sack. While
she was doing this a boy in a tattered cap ran up, snatched an apple out of the
basket, and tried to slip away; but the old woman noticed it, and turning, caught
the boy by his sleeve. He began to struggle, trying to free himself, but the old
woman held on with both hands, knocked his cap off his head, and seized hold
of his hair. The boy screamed and the old woman scolded. Martin dropped his
awl, not waiting to stick it in its place, and rushed out of the door. Stumbling up
the steps, and dropping his spectacles in his hurry, he ran out into the street. The
old woman was pulling the boy's hair and scolding him, and threatening to take
him to the police. The lad was struggling and protesting, saying, 'I did not take it.
What are you beating me for? Let me go!'
Martin separated them. He took the boy by the hand and said, 'Let him go,
Granny. Forgive him for Christ's sake.'
'I'll pay him out, so that he won't forget it for a year! I'll take the rascal to
the police!'
Martin began entreating the old woman.
'Let him go, Granny. He won't do it again. Let him go for Christ's sake!'
The old woman let go, and the boy wished to run away, but Martin
stopped him
'Ask the Granny's forgiveness!' said he. 'And don't do it another time. I
saw you take the apple.'
The boy began to cry and to beg pardon.
'That's right. And now here's an apple for you, and Martin took an apple
from the basket and gave it to the boy, saying, 'I will pay you, Granny.'
'You will spoil them that way, the young rascals,' said the old woman. 'He
ought to be whipped so that he should remember it for a week.'
'Oh, Granny, Granny,' said Martin, 'that's our way -- but it's not God's
way. If he should be whipped for stealing an apple, what should be done to us
for our sins?'
The old woman was silent.
84

And Martin told her the parable of the lord who forgave his servant a
large debt, and how the servant went out and seized his debtor by the throat. The
old woman listened to it all, and the boy, too, stood by and listened.
'God bids us forgive,' said Martin, 'or else we shall not be forgiven.
Forgive every one; and a thoughtless youngster most of all.'
The old woman wagged her head and sighed.
'It's true enough,' said she, 'but they are getting terribly spoilt.'
'Then we old ones must show them better ways,' Martin replied.
'That's just what I say,' said the old woman. 'I have had seven of them
myself, and only one daughter is left.' And the old woman began to tell how and
where she was living with her daughter, and how many grandchildren she had.
'There now,' she said, 'I have but little strength left, yet I work hard for the sake
of my grandchildren; and nice children they are, too. No one comes out to meet
me but the children. Little Annie, now, won't leave me for any one. "It's
grandmother, dear grandmother, darling grandmother."' And the old woman
completely softened at the thought.
'Of course, it was only his childishness, God help him,' said she, referring
to the boy.
As the old woman was about to hoist her sack on her back, the lad sprang
forward to her, saying, 'Let me carry it for you, Granny. I'm going that way.'
The old woman nodded her head, and put the sack on the boy's back, and
they went down the street together, the old woman quite forgetting to ask Martin
to pay for the apple. Martin stood and watched them as they went along talking
to each other.
When they were out of sight Martin went back to the house. Having found
his spectacles unbroken on the steps, he picked up his awl and sat down again to
work. He worked a little, but could soon not see to pass the bristle through the
holes in the leather; and presently he noticed the lamplighter passing on his way
to light the street lamps.
'Seems it's time to light up,' thought he. So he trimmed his lamp, hung it
up, and sat down again to work. He finished off one boot and, turning it about,
examined it. It was all right. Then he gathered his tools together, swept up the
cuttings, put away the bristles and the thread and the awls, and, taking down the
lamp, placed it on the table. Then he took the Gospels from the shelf. He meant to
open them at the place he had marked the day before with a bit of morocco, but
the book opened at another place. As Martin opened it, his yesterday's dream
came back to his mind, and no sooner had he thought of it than he seemed to
hear footsteps, as though some one were moving behind him. Martin turned
round, and it seemed to him as if people were standing in the dark corner, but he
could not make out who they were. And a voice whispered in his ear: 'Martin,
Martin, don't you know me?'
'Who is it?' muttered Martin.
'It is I,' said the voice. And out of the dark corner stepped Stepánitch, who
smiled and vanishing like a cloud was seen no more.
'It is I,' said the voice again. And out of the darkness stepped the woman
with the baby in her arms and the woman smiled and the baby laughed, and they
too vanished.
85

'It is I,' said the voice once more. And the old woman and the boy with the
apple stepped out and both smiled, and then they too vanished.
And Martin's soul grew glad. He crossed himself put on his spectacles,
and began reading the Gospel just where it had opened; and at the top of the
page he read
'I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in.'
And at the bottom of the page he read
'Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of these my brethren even these least, ye
did it unto me' (Matt. xxv).
And Martin understood that his dream had come true; and that the
Saviour had really come to him that day, and he had welcomed him.
1885.

86

PART III
A FAIRY TALE
8

THE STORY OF IVÁN THE FOOL,
AND OF HIS TWO BROTHERS, SIMON THE SOLDIER AND TARÁS
THE STOUT; AND OF HIS DUMB SISTER MARTHA, AND OF THE OLD
DEVIL AND THE THREE LITTLE IMPS.
ONCE upon a time, in a certain province of a certain country, there lived a rich
peasant, who had three sons: Simon the Soldier, Tarás the Stout, and Iván the
Fool, besides an unmarried daughter, Martha, who was deaf and dumb. Simon
the Soldier went to the wars to serve the king; Tarás the Stout went to a
merchant's in town to trade, and Iván the Fool stayed at home with the lass, to till
the ground till his back bent.
Simon the Soldier obtained high rank and an estate, and married a
nobleman's daughter. His pay was large and his estate was large, but yet he
could not make ends meet. What the husband earned his lady wife squandered,
and they never had money enough.
So Simon the Soldier went to his estate to collect the income, but his
steward said, 'where is any income to come from? We have neither cattle, nor
tools, nor horse, nor plough, nor harrow. We must first get all these, and then the
money will come.'
Then Simon the Soldier went to his father and said: 'You, father, are rich,
but have given me nothing. Divide what you have, and give me a third part, that
I may improve my estate.'
But the old man said: 'You brought nothing into my house; why should I
give you a third part? It would be unfair to Iván and to the girl.'
But Simon answered, 'He is a fool; and she is an old maid, and deaf and
dumb besides; what's the good of property to them?'
The old man said, 'We will see what Iván says about it.'
And Iván said, 'Let him take what he wants.'
So Simon the Soldier took his share of his father's goods and removed
them to his estate, and went off again to serve the king.
Tarás the Stout also gathered much money, and married into a merchant's
family, but still he wanted more. So he, also, came to his father and said, 'Give
me my portion.'
But the old man did not wish to give Tarás a share either, and said, 'You
brought nothing here. Iván has earned all we have in the house, and why should
we wrong him and the girl?'
But Tarás said, 'What does he need? He is a fool! He cannot marry, no one
would have him; and the dumb lass does not need anything either. Look here,
Iván!' said he, 'give me half the corn; I don't want the tools, and of the live stock I
will take only the grey stallion, which is of no use to you for the plough.'
87

Iván laughed and said, 'Take what you want. I will work to earn some
more.'
So they gave a share to Tarás also, and he carted the corn away to town,
and took the grey stallion. And Iván was left with one old mare, to lead his
peasant life as before, and to support his father and mother.
II
Now the old Devil was vexed that the brothers had not quarrelled over the
division, but had parted peacefully; and he summoned three imps.
'Look here,' said he, 'there are three brothers Simon the Soldier, Tarás the
Stout, and Iván the Fool. They should have quarrelled, but are living peaceably
and meet on friendly terms. The fool Iván has spoilt the whole business for me.
Now you three go and tackle those three brothers, and worry them till they
scratch each other's eyes out! Do you think you can do it?'
'Yes, we'll do it,' said they.
'How will you set about it?'
'Why,' said they, 'first we'll ruin them. And when they haven't a crust to
eat we'll tie them up together, and then they'll fight each other, sure enough!'
'That's capital; I see you understand your business. Go, and don't come
back till you've set them by the ears, or I'll skin you alive!'
The imps went off into a swamp, and began to consider how they should
set to work. They disputed and disputed, each wanting the lightest job; but at last
they decided to cast lots which of the brothers each imp should tackle. If one imp
finished his task before the others, he was to come and help them. So the imps
cast lots, and appointed a time to meet again in the swamp to learn who had
succeeded and who needed help.
The appointed time came round, and the imps met again in the swamp as
agreed. And each began to tell how matters stood. The first, who had undertaken
Simon the Soldier, began: 'My business is going on well. To-morrow Simon will
return to his father's house.'
His comrades asked, 'How did you manage it?'
'First,' says he, 'I made Simon so bold that he offered to conquer the whole
world for his king; and the king made him his general and sent him to fight the
King of India. They met for battle, but the night before, I damped all the powder
in Simon's camp, and made more straw soldiers for the Indian King than you
could count. And when Simon's soldiers saw the straw soldiers surrounding
them, they grew frightened. Simon ordered them to fire; but their cannons and
guns would not go off. Then Simon's soldiers were quite frightened, and ran like
sheep, and the Indian King slaughtered them. Simon was disgraced. He has been
deprived of his estate, and to-morrow they intend to execute him. There is only
one day's work left for me to do; I have just to let him out of prison that he may
escape home. To-morrow I shall be ready to help whichever of you needs me.
Then the second imp, who had Tarás in hand, began to tell how he had
fared. 'I don't want any help,' said he, 'my job is going all right. Tarás can't hold
out for more than a week. First I caused him to grow greedy and fat. His
covetousness became so great that whatever he saw he wanted to buy. He has
88

spent all his money in buying immense lots of goods, and still continues to buy.
Already he has begun to use borrowed money. His debts hang like a weight
round his neck, and he is so involved that he can never get clear. In a week his
bills come due, and before then I will spoil all his stock. He will be unable to pay
and will have to go home to his father.'
Then they asked the third imp (Ivan's), 'And how are you getting on?'
'Well,' said he, 'my affair goes badly. First I spat into his drink to make his
stomach ache, and then I went into his field and hammered the ground hard as a
stone that he should not be able to till it. I thought he wouldn't plough it, but like
the fool that he is, he came with his plough and began to make a furrow. He
groaned with the pain in his stomach, but went on ploughing. I broke his plough
for him, but he went home, got out another, and again started ploughing. I crept
under the earth and caught hold of the ploughshares, but there was no holding
them; he leant heavily upon the plough, and the ploughshare was sharp and cut
my hands. He has all but finished ploughing the field, only one little strip is left.
Come brothers, and help me; for if we don't get the better of him, all our labour is
lost. If the fool holds out and keeps on working the land, his brothers will never
know want, for he will feed them both.'
Simon the Soldier's imp promised to come next day to help, and so they
parted.
III
Iván had ploughed up the whole fallow, all but one little strip. He came to
finish it. Though his stomach ached, the ploughing must be done. He freed the
harness ropes, turned the plough, and began to work. He drove one furrow, but
coming back the plough began to drag as if it had caught in a root. It was the
imp, who had twisted his legs round the ploughshare and was holding it back.
'What a strange thing!' thought Iván. 'There were no roots here at all, and
yet here's a root.'
Iván pushed his hand deep into the furrow, groped about, and, feeling
something soft, seized hold of it and pulled it out. It was black like a root, but it
wriggled. Why, it was a live imp!
'What a nasty thing!' said Iván, and he lifted his hand to dash it against the
plough, but the imp squealed out:
'Don't hurt me, and I'll do anything you tell me to.'
'What can you do?'
'Anything you tell me to.'
Iván scratched his head.
'My stomach aches,' said he; 'can you cure that?'
'Certainly I can.'
'Well then, do so.'
The imp went down into the furrow, searched about scratched with his
claws, and pulled out a bunch of three little roots, which he handed to Iván.
'Here,' says he, 'whoever swallows one of these will be cured of any
illness.'
89

Iván took the roots, separated them, and swallowed one. The pain in his
stomach was cured at once. The imp again begged to be let off; 'I will jump right
into the earth, and never come back,' said he.
'All right,' said Iván; 'begone, and God be with you!'
And as soon as Iván mentioned God, the imp plunged into the earth like a
stone thrown into the water. Only a hole was left.
Iván put the other two pieces of root into his cap and went on with his
ploughing. He ploughed the strip to the end, turned his plough over, and went
home. He unharnessed the horse, entered the hut, and there he saw his elder
brother, Simon the Soldier and his wife, sitting at supper. Simon's estate had
been confiscated, he himself had barely managed to escape from prison, and he
had come back to live in his father's house.
Simon saw Iván, and said: 'I have come to live with you. Feed me and my
wife till I get another appointment.'
'All right,' said Iván, 'you can stay with us.'
But when Iván was about to sit down on the bench the lady disliked the
smell, and said to her husband. 'I cannot sup with a dirty peasant.'
So Simon the Soldier said, 'My lady says you don't smell nice. You'd better
go and eat outside.'
'All right,' said Iván; 'any way I must spend the night outside, for I have to
pasture the mare.'
So he took some bread, and his coat, and went with the mare into the
fields.
IV
Having finished his work that night, Simon's imp came, as agreed, to find
Iván's imp and help him to subdue the fool. He came to the field and searched
and searched; but instead of his comrade he found only a hole.
'Clearly,' thought he, 'some evil has befallen my comrade. I must take his
place. The field is ploughed up, so the fool must be tackled in the meadow.'
So the imp went to the meadows and flooded Iván's hayfield with water,
which left the grass all covered with mud.
Iván returned from the pasture at dawn, sharpened his scythe, and went
to mow the hayfield. He began to mow but had only swung the scythe once or
twice when the edge turned so that it would not cut at all, but needed
resharpening. Iván struggled on for awhile, and then said: 'It's no good. I must go
home and bring a tool to straighten the scythe, and I'll get a chunk of bread at the
same time. If I have to spend a week here, I won't leave till the mowing's done.'
The imp heard this and thought to himself, 'This fool is a tough 'un; I can't
get round him this way. I must try some other dodge.'
Iván returned, sharpened his scythe, and began to mow. The imp crept
into the grass and began to catch the scythe by the heel, sending the point into
the earth. Iván found the work very hard, but he mowed the whole meadow,
except one little bit which was in the swamp. The imp crept into the swamp and,
thought he to himself, 'Though I cut my paws I will not let him mow.'
90

Iván reached the swamp. The grass didn't seem thick, but yet it resisted
the scythe. Iván grew angry and began to swing the scythe with all his might.
The imp had to give in; he could not keep up with the scythe, and, seeing it was a
bad business, he scrambled into a bush. Iván swung the scythe, caught the bush,
and cut off half the imp's tail. Then he finished mowing the grass, told his sister
to rake it up, and went himself to mow the rye. He went with the scythe, but the
dock-tailed imp was there first, and entangled the rye so that the scythe was of
no use. But Iván went home and got his sickle, and began to reap with that and
he reaped the whole of the rye.
'Now it's time,' said he, 'to start on the oats.'
The dock-tailed imp heard this, and thought, 'I couldn't get the better of
him on the rye, but I shall on the oats. Only wait till the morning.'
In the morning the imp hurried to the oat field, but the oats were already
mowed down! Iván had mowed them by night, in order that less grain should
shake out. The imp grew angry.
'He has cut me all over and tired me out -- the fool. It is worse than war.
The accursed fool never sleeps; one can't keep up with him. I will get into his
stacks now and rot them.'
So the imp entered the rye, and crept among the sheaves, and they began
to rot. He heated them, grew warm himself, and fell asleep.
Iván harnessed the mare, and went with the lass to cart the rye. He came
to the heaps, and began to pitch the rye into the cart. He tossed two sheaves and
again thrust his fork -- right into the imp's back. He lifts the fork and sees on the
prongs a live imp; dock-tailed, struggling, wriggling, and trying to jump.
'What, you nasty thing, are you here again?'
'I'm another,' said the imp. 'The first was my brother. I've been with your
brother Simon.'
'Well,' said Iván, whoever you are, you've met the same fate!'
He was about to dash him against the cart, but the imp cried out: 'Let me
off, and I will not only let you alone, but I'll do anything you tell me to do.'
'What can you do?'
'I can make soldiers out of anything you like.'
'But what use are they?'
'You can turn them to any use; they can do anything you please.'
'Can they sing?'
'Yes, if you want them to.'
'All right; you may make me some.'
And the imp said, 'Here, take a sheaf of rye, then bump it upright on the
ground, and simply say:
'O sheaf! my slave
This order gave:
Where a straw has been
Let a soldier be seen!'

91

Iván took the sheaf, struck it on the ground, and said what the imp had
told him to. The sheaf fell asunder, and all the straws changed into soldiers, with
a trumpeter and a drummer playing in front, so that there was a whole regiment.
Iván laughed.
'How clever!' said he. 'This is fine! How pleased the girls will be!'
'Now let me go,' said the imp.
'No,' said Iván, 'I must make my soldiers of thrashed straw, otherwise
good grain will be wasted. Teach me how to change them back again into the
sheaf. I want to thrash it.'
And the imp said, 'Repeat:
'Let each be a straw
Who was soldier before,
For my true slave
This order gave!"'
Iván said this, and the sheaf reappeared.
Again the imp began to beg, 'Now let me go!
'All right.' And Iván pressed him against the side of the cart, held him
down with his hand, and pulled him off the fork.
'God be with you,' said he.
And as soon as he mentioned God, the imp plunged into the earth like a
stone into water. Only a hole was left.
Iván returned home, and there was his other brother, Tarás with his wife,
sitting at supper.
Taras the Stout had failed to pay his debts, had run away from his
creditors, and had come home to his father's house. When he saw Iván, 'Look
here', said he, 'till I can start in business again, I want you to keep me and my
wife.'
'All right,' said Iván, 'you can live here, if you like.'
Iván took off his coat and sat down to table, but the merchant's wife said:
'I cannot sit at table with this clown, he smells of perspiration.'
Then Tarás the Stout said, 'Iván, you smell too strong. Go and eat outside.'
'All right,' said Iván, taking some bread and going into the yard. 'It is time,
anyhow, for me to go and pasture the mare.'
V
Tarás's imp, being also free that night, came, as agreed, to help his
comrades subdue Iván the Fool. He came to the cornfield, looked and looked for
his comrades -- no one was there. He only found a hole. He went to the meadow,
and there he found an imp's tail in the swamp, and another hole in the rye
stubble.
'Evidently, some ill-luck has befallen my comrades,' thought he. 'I must
take their place and tackle the fool.'
So the imp went to look for Iván, who had already stacked the corn and
was cutting trees in the wood. The two brothers had begun to feel crowded,
92

living together, and had told Iván to cut down trees to build new houses for
them.
The imp ran to the wood, climbed among the branches, and began to
hinder Iván from felling the trees. Iván undercut one tree so that it should fall
clear, but in falling it turned askew and caught among some branches. Iván cut a
pole with which to lever it aside, and with difficulty contrived to bring it to the
ground. He set to work to fell another tree -- again the same thing occurred; and
with all his efforts he could hardly get the tree clear. He began on a third tree,
and again the same thing happened.
Iván had hoped to cut down half a hundred small trees, but had not felled
even half a score, and now the night was come and he was tired out. The steam
from him spread like a mist through the wood, but still he stuck to his work. He
undercut another tree, but his back began to ache so that he could not stand. He
drove his axe into the tree and sat down to rest.
The imp, noticing that Iván had stopped work, grew cheerful.
'At last,' thought he, 'he is tired out! He will give it up. Now I can take a
rest myself.'
He seated himself astride a branch and chuckled. But soon Iván got up,
pulled the axe out, swung it and smote the tree from the opposite side with such
force that the tree gave way at once and came crashing down. The imp had not
expected this, and had no time to get his feet clear, and the tree in breaking,
gripped his paw. Iván began to lop off the branches, when he noticed a live imp
hanging in the tree! Iván was surprised.
'What, you nasty thing,' says he, 'so you are here again!'
'I am another one,' says the imp. 'I have been with your brother Tarás.'
'Whoever you are you have met your fate,' said Iván, and swinging his axe
he was about to strike him with the haft, but the imp begged for mercy: 'Don't
strike me,' said he, 'and I will do anything you tell me to.'
'What can you do?'
'I can make money for you, as much as you want.'
'All right, make some.' So the imp showed him how to do it.
'Take,' said he, 'some leaves from this oak and rub them in your hands,
and gold will fall out on the ground.'
Iván took some leaves and rubbed them, and gold ran down from his
hands.
'This stuff will do fine,' said he, 'for the fellows to play with on their
holidays.'
'Now let me go.' said the imp.
'All right,' said Iván, and taking a lever he set the imp free. 'Now begone!
And God be with you,' says he.
And as soon as he mentioned God, the imp plunged into the earth, like a
stone into water. Only a hole was left.
VI

93

So the brothers built houses, and began to live apart; and Iván finished the
harvest work, brewed beer, and invited his brothers to spend the next holiday
with him. His brothers would not come.
'We don't care about peasant feasts,' said they.
So Iván entertained the peasants and their wives, and drank until he was
rather tipsy. Then he went into the street to a ring of dancers; and going up to
them he told the women to sing a song in his honour; 'for,' said he, 'I will give
you something you never saw in your lives before!'
The women laughed and sang his praises, and when they had finished
they said, 'Now let us have your gift.'
'I will bring it directly,' said he.
He took a seed-basket and ran into the woods. The women laughed. 'He is
a fool!' said they, and they began to talk of something else.
But soon Iván came running back, carrying the basket full of something
heavy.
'Shall I give it you?'
'Yes! give it to us.'
Iván took a handful of gold and threw it to the women. You should have
seen them throw themselves upon it to pick it up! And the men around
scrambled for it, and snatched it from one another. One old woman was nearly
crushed to death. Iván laughed.
'Oh, you fools!' says he. 'Why did you crush the old grandmother? Be
quiet, and I will give you some more,' and he threw them some more. The people
all crowded round, and Iván threw them all the gold he had. They asked for
more, but Iván said, 'I have no more just now. Another time I'll give you some
more. Now let us dance, and you can sing me your songs.'
The women began to sing.
'Your songs are no good,' says he.
'Where will you find better ones?' say they.
'I'll soon show you,' says he.
He went to the barn, took a sheaf, thrashed it, stood it up, and bumped it
on the ground.
'Now,' said he:
'O sheaf! my slave
This order gave:
Where a straw has been
Let a soldier be seen!'
And the sheaf fell asunder and became so many soldiers. The drums and
trumpets began to play. Iván ordered the soldiers to play and sing. He led them
out into the street, and the people were amazed, The soldiers played and sang,
and then Iván (forbidding any one to follow him) led them back to the thrashing
ground, changed them into a sheaf again, and threw it in its place.
He then went home and lay down in the stables to sleep.
VII
94

Simon the Soldier heard of all these things next morning, and went to his
brother.
'Tell me,' says he, 'where you got those soldiers from, and where you have
taken them to?'
'What does it matter to you?' said Iván.
'What does it matter? Why, with soldiers one can do anything. One can
win a kingdom.'
Iván wondered.
'Really!' said he; 'Why didn't you say so before? I'll make you as many as
you like. It's well the lass and I have thrashed so much straw.'
Iván took his brother to the barn and said:
'Look here; if I make you some soldiers, you must take them away at once,
for if we have to feed them, they will eat up the whole village in a day.'
Simon the Soldier promised to lead the soldiers away; and Iván began to
make them. He bumped a sheaf on the thrashing floor -- a company appeared.
He bumped another sheaf, and there was a second company. He made so many
that they covered the field.
'Will that do?' he asked.
Simon was overjoyed, and said: 'That will do! Thank you, Iván!'
'All right' said Iván. 'If you want more, come back, and I'll make them.
There is plenty of straw this season.'
Simon the Soldier at once took command of his army, collected and
organized it, and went off to make war.
Hardly had Simon the Soldier gone, when Tarás the Stout came along. He,
too, had heard of yesterday's affair, and he said to his brother:
'Show me where you get gold money! If I only had some to start with, I
could make it bring me in money from all over the world.'
Iván was astonished.
'Really!' said he. 'You should have told me sooner. I will make you as
much as you like.'
His brother was delighted.
'Give me three baskets-full to begin with.'
'All right,' said Iván. 'Come into the forest; or better still, let us harness the
mare, for you won't be able to carry it all.'
They drove to the forest, and Iván began to rub the oak leaves. He made a
great heap of gold.
'Will that do?'
Tarás was overjoyed.
'It will do for the present,' said he. 'Thank you, Iván!'
'All right,' says Iván, 'if you want more, come back for it. There are plenty
of leaves left.'
Tarás the Stout gathered up a whole cartload of money, and went off to
trade.
So the two brothers went away: Simon to fight and Tarás to buy and sell.
And Simon the Soldier conquered a kingdom for himself; and Tarás the Stout
made much money in trade.
95

When the two brothers met, each told the other: Simon how he got the
soldiers, and Tarás how he got the money. And Simon the Soldier said to his
brother, I have conquered a kingdom and live in grand style but I have not
money enough to keep my soldiers.'
And Tarás the Stout said, 'And I have made much money, but the trouble
is, I have no one to guard it.'
Then said Simon the Soldier, 'Let us go to our brother. I will tell him to
make more soldiers, and will give them to you to guard your money, and you
can tell him to make money for me to feed my men.
And they drove away to Iván; and Simon said, 'Dear brother, I have not
enough soldiers; make me another couple of ricks or so.'
Iván shook his head.
'No!' says he' 'I will not make any more soldiers.'
'But you promised you would.'
'I know I promised, but I won't make any more.'
'But why not, fool?'
'Because your soldiers killed a man. I was ploughing the other day near
the road, and I saw a woman taking a coffin along in a cart, and crying. I asked
her who was dead. She said, "Simon's soldiers have killed my husband in the
war." I thought the soldiers would only play tunes, but they have killed a man. I
won't give you any more.'
And he stuck to it, and would not make any more soldiers.
Tarás the Stout, too, began to beg Iván to make him more gold money. But
Iván shook his head.
'No, I won't make any more,' said he.
'Didn't you promise?'
'I did, but I'll make no more,' said he.
'Why not, fool?'
'Because your gold coins took away the cow from Michael's daughter.'
'How?'
'Simply took it away! Michael's daughter had a cow. Her children used to
drink the milk. But the other day her children came to me to ask for milk. I said,
"Where's your cow?" They answered, "The steward of Tarás the Stout came and
gave mother three bits of gold, and she gave him the cow, so we have nothing to
drink." I thought you were only going to play with the gold pieces, but you have
taken the children's cow away. I will not give you any more.'
And Iván stuck to it and would not give him any more. So the brothers
went away. And as they went they discussed how they could meet their
difficulties. And Simon said:
'Look here, I tell you what to do. You give me money to feed my soldiers,
and I will give you half my kingdom with soldiers enough to guard your money.'
Tarás agreed. So the brothers divided what they possessed, and both became
kings, and both were rich.
VIII

96

Iván lived at home, supporting his father and mother and working in the
fields with his dumb sister. Now it happened that Iván's yard-dog fell sick, grew
mangy, and was near dying. Iván, pitying it, got some bread from his sister, put
it in his cap, carried it out, and threw it to the dog. But the cap was torn, and
together with the bread one of the little roots fell to the ground. The old dog ate it
up with the bread, and as soon as she had swallowed it she jumped up and
began to play, bark, and wag her tail -- in short became quite well again.
The father and mother saw it and were amazed.
'How did you cure the dog?' asked they.
Iván answered: 'I had two little roots to cure any pain, and she swallowed
one.'
Now about that time it happened that the King's daughter fell ill, and the
King proclaimed in every town and village, that he would reward any one who
could heal her, and if any unmarried man could heal the King's daughter he
should have her for his wife. This was proclaimed in Ivan's village as well as
everywhere else.
His father and mother called Iván, and said to him: 'Have you heard what
the King has proclaimed? You said you had a root that would cure any sickness.
Go and heal the King's daughter, and you will be made happy for life.'
'All right,' said he.
And Iván prepared to go, and they dressed him in his best. But as he went
out of the door he met a beggar woman with a crippled hand.
'I have heard,' said she, 'that you can heal people. I pray you cure my arm,
for I cannot even put on my boots myself.'
'All right,' said Iván, and giving the little root to the beggar woman he told
her to swallow it. She swallowed it, and was cured. She was at once able to move
her arm freely.
His father and mother came out to accompany Iván to the King, but when
they heard that he had given away the root, and that he had nothing left to cure
the King's daughter with, they began to scold him.
'You pity a beggar woman, but are not sorry for the King's daughter!' said
they. But Iván felt sorry for the King's daughter also. So he harnessed the horse,
put straw in the cart to sit on, and sat down to drive away.
'Where are you going, fool?'
'To cure the King's daughter.'
'But you've nothing left to cure her with?'
'Never mind,' said he, and drove off.
He drove to the King's palace, and as soon as he stepped on the threshold
the King's daughter got well.
The King was delighted, and had Iván brought to him, and had him
dressed in fine robes.
'Be my son-in-law,' said he.
'All right,' said Iván.
And Iván married the Princess. Her father died soon after, and Iván
became King. So all three brothers were now kings.
IX
97

The three brothers lived and reigned. The eldest brother, Simon the
Soldier, prospered. With his straw soldiers he levied real soldiers. He ordered
throughout his whole kingdom a levy of one soldier from every ten houses, and
each soldier had to be tall, and clean in body and in face. He gathered many such
soldiers and trained them; and when any one opposed him, he sent these soldiers
at once, and got his own way, so that every one began to fear him, and his life
was a comfortable one. Whatever he cast his eyes on and wished for, was his. He
sent soldiers, and they brought him all he desired.
Tarás the Stout also lived comfortably. He did not waste the money he got
from Iván, but increased it largely. He introduced law and order into his
kingdom. He kept his money in coffers, and taxed the people. He instituted a
poll-tax, tolls for walking and driving, and a tax on shoes and stockings and
dress trimmings. And whatever he wished for he got. For the sake of money,
people brought him everything, and they offered to work for him -- for every one
wanted money.
Iván the Fool, also, did not live badly. As soon as he had buried his fatherin-law, he took off all his royal robes and gave them to his wife to put away in a
chest; and he again donned his hempen shirt, his breeches and peasant shoes,
and started again to work.
'It's dull for me,' said he. 'I'm getting fat and have lost my appetite and my
sleep.' So he brought his father and mother and his dumb sister to live with him,
and worked as before.
People said, 'But you are a king!'
'Yes,' said he, 'but even a king must eat.'
One of his ministers came to him and said, 'We have no money to pay
salaries.'
'All right,' says he, 'then don't pay them.'
'Then no one will serve.'
'All right; let them not serve. They will have more time to work; let them
cart manure. There is plenty of scavenging to be done.'
And people came to Iván to be tried. One said. 'He stole my money.' And
Iván said, 'All right, that shows that he wanted it.'
And they all got to know that Iván was a fool. And his wife said to him,
'People say that you are a fool.'
'All right,' said Iván.
His wife thought and thought about it, but she also was a fool.
'Shall I go against my husband? Where the needle goes the thread follows,'
said she.
So she took off her royal dress, put it away in a chest, and went to the
dumb girl to learn to work. And she learned to work and began to help her
husband.
And all the wise men left Iván's kingdom; only the fools remained.
Nobody had money. They lived and worked. They fed themselves; and
they fed others.
The old Devil waited and waited for news from the imps of their having
ruined the three brothers. But no news came. So he went himself to inquire about
98

it. He searched and searched, but instead of finding the three imps he found only
the three holes.
'Evidently they have failed,' thought he. 'I shall have to tackle it myself.'
So he went to look for the brothers, but they were no longer in their old
places. He found them in three different kingdoms. All three were living and
reigning. This annoyed the old Devil very much.
'Well,' said he, 'I must try my own hand at the job.'
First he went to King Simon. He did not go to him in his own shape, but
disguised himself as a general, and drove to Simon's palace.
'I hear, King Simon,' said he, 'that you are a great warrior, and as I know
that business well, I desire to serve you.'
King Simon questioned him, and seeing that he was a wise man, took him
into his service.
The new commander began to teach King Simon how to form a strong
army.
'First,' said he, 'we must levy more soldiers, for there are in your kingdom
many people unemployed. We must recruit all the young men without
exception. Then you will have five times as many soldiers as formerly. Secondly,
we must get new rifles and cannons. I will introduce rifles that will fire a
hundred balls at once; they will fly out like peas. And I will get cannons that will
consume with fire either man, or horse, or wall. They will burn up everything!'
Simon the King listened to the new commander, ordered all young men
without exception to be enrolled as soldiers, and had new factories built in which
he manufactured large quantities of improved rifles and cannons. Then he made
haste to declare war against a neighbouring king. As soon as he met the other
army, King Simon ordered his soldiers to rain balls against it and shoot fire from
the cannons, and at one blow he burned and crippled half the enemy's army. The
neighbouring king was so thoroughly frightened that he gave way and
surrendered his kingdom. King Simon was delighted.
'Now,' said he, 'I will conquer the King of India.'
But the Indian King had heard about King Simon and had adopted all his
inventions, and added more of his own. The Indian King enlisted not only all the
young men, but all the single women also, and got together a greater army even
than King Simon's. And he copied all King Simon's rifles and cannons, and
invented a way of flying through the air to throw explosive bombs from above.
King Simon set out to fight the Indian King, expecting to beat him as he
had beaten the other king; but the scythe that had cut so well had lost its edge.
The King of India did not let Simon's army come within gunshot, but sent his
women through the air to hurl down explosive bombs on to Simon's army. The
women began to rain down bombs on to the army like borax upon cockroaches.
The army ran away, and Simon the King was left alone. So the Indian King took
Simon's kingdom, and Simon the Soldier fled as best he might.
Having finished with this brother, the old Devil went to King Tarás.
Changing himself into a merchant, he settled in Tarás's kingdom, started a house
of business, and began spending money. He paid high prices for everything, and
everybody hurried to the new merchant's to get money. And so much money
99

spread among the people that they began to pay all their taxes promptly, and
paid up all their arrears, and King Tarás rejoiced.
'Thanks to the new merchant,' thought he, 'I shall have more money than
ever; and my life will be yet more comfortable.'
And Tarás the King began to form fresh plans, and began to build a new
palace. He gave notice that people should bring him wood and stone, and come
to work, and he fixed high prices for everything. King Tarás thought people
would come in crowds to work as before, but to his surprise all the wood and
stone was taken to the merchant's, and all the workmen went there too. King
Tarás increased his price, but the merchant bid yet more. King Tarás had much
money, but the merchant had still more, and outbid the King at every point.
The King's palace was at a standstill; the building did not get on.
King Tarás planned a garden, and when autumn came he called for the
people to come and plant the garden, but nobody came. All the people were
engaged digging a pond for the merchant. Winter came, and King Tarás wanted
to buy sable furs for a new overcoat. He sent to buy them, but the messengers
returned and said, 'There are no sables left. The merchant has all the furs. He
gave the best price, and made carpets of the skins.'
King Tarás wanted to buy some stallions. He sent to buy them, but the
messengers returned saying, 'The merchant has all the good stallions; they are
carrying water to fill his pond.
All the King's affairs came to a standstill. Nobody would work for him, for
every one was busy working for the merchant; and they only brought King Tarás
the merchant's money to pay their taxes.
And the King collected so much money that he had nowhere to store it,
and his life became wretched. He ceased to form plans, and would have been
glad enough simply to live, but he was hardly able even to do that. He ran short
of everything. One after another his cooks, coachmen, and servants left him to go
to the merchant. Soon he lacked even food. When he sent to the market to buy
anything, there was nothing to be got -- the merchant had bought up everything,
and people only brought the King money to pay their taxes.
Tarás the King got angry and banished the merchant from the country.
But the merchant settled just across the frontier, and went on as before. For the
sake of the merchant's money, people took everything to him instead of to the
King.
Things went badly with King Tarás. For days together he had nothing to
eat, and a rumour even got about that the merchant was boasting that he would
buy up the King himself! King Tarás got frightened, and did not know what to
do.
At this time Simon the Soldier came to him, saying, 'Help me, for the King
of India has conquered me.'
But King Tarás himself was over head and ears in difficulties. 'I myself,'
said he, 'have had nothing to eat for two days.'
XI

100

Having done with the two brothers, the old Devil went to Iván. He
changed himself into a General, and coming to Iván began to persuade him that
he ought to have an army.
'It does not become a king,' said he, 'to be without an army. Only give me
the order, and I will collect soldiers from among your people, and form one.'
Iván listened to him. 'All right,' said Iván, 'form an army, and teach them
to sing songs well. I like to hear them do that.'
So the old Devil went through Ivan's kingdom to enlist men. He told them
to go and be entered as soldiers, and each should have a quart of spirits and a
fine red cap.
The people laughed.
'We have plenty of spirits,' said they. 'We make it ourselves; and as for
caps, the women make all kinds of them, even striped ones with tassels.'
So nobody would enlist.
The old Devil came to Iván and said: 'Your fools won't enlist of their own
free will. We shall have to make them.'
'All right,' said Iván, 'you can try.'
So the old Devil gave notice that all the people were to enlist, and that
Iván would put to death any one who refused.
The people came to the General and said, 'You say that if we do not go as
soldiers the King will put us to death, but you don't say what will happen if we
do enlist. We have heard say that soldiers get killed!'
'Yes, that happens sometimes.'
When the people heard this they became obstinate.
'We won't go,' said they. 'Better meet death at home. Either way we must
die.'
'Fools! You are fools!' said the old Devil. 'A soldier may be killed or he
may not, but if you don't go, King Iván will have you killed for certain.'
The people were puzzled, and went to Iván the Fool to consult him.
'A General has come,' said they, 'who says we must all become soldiers. "If
you go as soldiers," says he "you may be killed or you may not, but if you don't
go, King Iván will certainly kill you." Is this true?'
Iván laughed and said, 'How can I, alone, put all you to death? If I were
not a fool I would explain it to you but as it is, I don't understand it myself.'
'Then' said they, 'we will not serve.'
'All right,' says he, 'don't.'
So the people went to the General and refused to enlist. And the old Devil
saw that this game was up, and he went off and ingratiated himself with the
King of Tarakán.
'Let us make war,' says he, 'and conquer King Iván's country. It is true
there is no money, but there is plenty of corn and cattle and everything else.'
So the King of Tarakán prepared to make war. He mustered a great army,
provided rifles and cannons, marched to the frontier, and entered Iván's
kingdom.
And people came to Iván and said, 'The King of Tarakán is coming to
make war on us.'
'All right,' said Iván, 'let him come.'
101

Having crossed the frontier, the King of Tarakán sent scouts to look for
Iván's army. They looked and looked, but there was no army! They waited and
waited for one to appear somewhere, but there were no signs of an army, and
nobody to fight with. The King of Tarakán then sent to seize the villages. The
soldiers came to a village, and the people, both men and women, rushed out in
astonishment to stare at the soldiers. The soldiers began to take their corn and
cattle; the people let them have it, and did not resist. The soldiers went on to
another village; the same thing happened again. The soldiers went on for one
day, and for two days, and everywhere the same thing happened. The people let
them have everything, and no one resisted, but only invited the soldiers to live
with them.
'Poor fellows,' said they, 'if you have a hard life in your own land, why
don't you come and stay with us altogether?'
The soldiers marched and marched: still no army, only people living and
feeding themselves and others, and not resisting, but inviting the soldiers to stay
and live with them. The soldiers found it dull work, and they came to the King of
Tarakán and said, 'We cannot fight here, lead us elsewhere. War is all right, but
what is this? It is like cutting pea-soup! We will not make war here any more.'
The King of Tarakán grew angry, and ordered his soldiers to over-run the
whole kingdom, to destroy the villages, to burn the grain and the houses, and to
slaughter the cattle. 'And if you do not obey my orders,' said he, 'I will execute
you all.'
The soldiers were frightened, and began to act according to the King's
orders. They began to burn houses and corn, and to kill cattle. But the fools still
offered no resistance, and only wept. The old men wept, and the old women
wept, and the young people wept.
'Why do you harm us?' they said. 'Why do you waste good things? If you
need them, why do you not take them for yourselves?'
At last the soldiers could stand it no longer. They refused to go any
further, and the army disbanded and fled.
XII
The old Devil had to give it up. He could not get the better of Iván with
soldiers. So he changed himself into a fine gentleman, and settled down in Ivan's
kingdom. He meant to overcome him by means of money, as he had overcome
Tarás the Stout.
'I wish,' says he, 'to do you a good turn, to teach you sense and reason. I
will build a house among you and organize a trade.'
'All right,' said Iván, 'come and live among us if you like.'
Next morning the fine gentleman went out into the public square with a
big sack of gold and a sheet of paper, and said, 'You all live like swine. I wish to
teach you how to live properly. Build me a house according to this plan. You
shall work, I will tell you how, and I will pay you with gold coins.' And he
showed them the gold.

102

The fools were astonished; there was no money in use among them; they
bartered their goods, and paid one another with labour. They looked at the gold
coins with surprise.
'What nice little things they are!' said they.
And they began to exchange their goods and labour for the gentleman's
gold pieces. And the old Devil began, as in Tarás's kingdom, to be free with his
gold, and the people began to exchange everything for gold and to do all sorts of
work for it.
The old Devil was delighted, and thought he to himself, 'Things are going
right this time. Now I shall ruin the Fool as I did Tarás, and I shall buy him up
body and soul.'
But as soon as the fools had provided themselves with gold pieces they
gave them to the women for necklaces. The lasses plaited them into their tresses,
and at last the children in the street began to play with the little pieces.
Everybody had plenty of them, and they stopped taking them. But the fine
gentleman's mansion was not yet half-built, and the grain and cattle for the year
were not yet provided. So he gave notice that he wished people to come and
work for him, and that he wanted cattle and grain; for each thing, and for each
service, he was ready to give many more pieces of gold.
But nobody came to work and nothing was brought. Only sometimes a
boy or a little girl would run up to exchange an egg for a gold coin, but nobody
else came, and he had nothing to eat. And being hungry, the fine gentleman went
through the village to try and buy something for dinner. He tried at one house,
and offered a gold piece for a fowl, but the housewife wouldn't take it.
'I have a lot already,' said she.
He tried at a widow's house to buy a herring, and offered a gold piece.
'I don't want it, my good sir,' said she. 'I have no children to play with it,
and I myself already have three coins as curiosities.'
He tried at a peasant's house to get bread, but neither would the peasant
take money.
'I don't need it,' said he, 'but if you are begging "for Christ's sake15," wait a
bit and I'll tell the housewife to cut you a piece of bread.'
At that the Devil spat, and ran away. To hear Christ's name mentioned, let
alone receiving anything for Christ's sake, hurt him more than sticking a knife
into him.
And so he got no bread. Every one had gold, and no matter where the old
Devil went, nobody would give anything for money, but every one said, 'Either
bring something else, or come and work, or receive what you want in charity for
Christ's sake.'
But the old Devil had nothing but money; for work he had no liking, and
as for taking anything 'for Christ's sake' he could not do that. The old Devil grew
very angry.
'What more do you want, when I give you money?' said he. 'You can buy
everything with gold, and hire any kind of labourer.' But the fools did not heed
him.
15'For Christ's sake' is the usual appeal of Russian beggars or poor pilgrims.

103

'No, we do not want money,' said they. 'We have no payments to make,
and no taxes, so what should we do with it?'
The old Devil lay down to sleep -- supperless.
The affair was told to Iván the Fool. People came and asked him, 'What
are we to do? A fine gentleman has turned up, who likes to eat and drink and
dress well, but he does not like to work, does not beg in "Christ's name," but only
offers gold pieces to every one. At first people gave him all he wanted until they
had plenty of gold pieces, but now no one gives him anything. What's to be done
with him? He will die of hunger before long.'
Iván listened.
'All right,' says he, 'we must feed him. Let him live by turn at each house
as a shepherd16 does.'
There was no help for it. The old Devil had to begin making the round.
In due course the turn came for him to go to Ivan's house. The old Devil
came in to dinner, and the dumb girl was getting it ready.
She had often been deceived by lazy folk who came early to dinner -without having done their share of work -- and ate up all the porridge, so it had
occurred to her to find out the sluggards by their hands. Those who had horny
hands, she put at the table, but the others got only the scraps that were left over.
The old Devil sat down at the table, but the dumb girl seized him by the
hands and looked at them -- there were no hard places there: the hands were
clean and smooth, with long nails. The dumb girl gave a grunt and pulled the
Devil away from the table. And Iván's wife said to him, 'Don't be offended, fine
gentleman. My sister-in-law does not allow any one to come to table who hasn't
horny hands. But wait awhile, after the folk have eaten you shall have what is
left.'
The old Devil was offended that in the King's house they wished him to
feed like a pig. He said to Iván, 'It is a foolish law you have in your kingdom that
every one must work with his hands. It's your stupidity that invented it. Do
people work only with their hands? What do you think wise men work with?'
And Iván said, 'How are we fools to know? We do most of our work with
our hands and our backs.'
'That is because you are fools! But I will teach you how to work with the
head. Then you will know that it is more profitable to work with the head than
with the hands.'
Iván was surprised.
'If that is so' said he, 'then there is some sense in calling us fools!'
And the old Devil went on. 'Only it is not easy to work with one's head.
You give me nothing to eat, because I have no hard places on my hands, but you
do not know that it is a hundred times more difficult to work with the head.
Sometimes one's head quite splits.'
Iván became thoughtful.

16It is often arranged that the shepherd who looks after the cattle of a Russian village Commune

should get his board and lodging at the houses of the villagers, passing from one to another in
turn.

104

'Why, then, friend, do you torture yourself so? Is it pleasant when the
head splits? Would it not be better to do easier work with your hands and your
back?'
But the Devil said, 'I do it all out of pity for you fools. If I didn't torture
myself you would remain fools for ever. But, having worked with my head, I can
now teach you.'
Iván was surprised.
'Do teach us!' said he, 'so that when our hands get cramped we may use
our heads for a change.'
And the Devil promised to teach the people. So Iván gave notice
throughout the kingdom that a fine gentleman had come who would teach
everybody how to work with their heads; that with the head more could be done
than with the hands; and that the people ought all to come and learn.
Now there was in Ivan's kingdom a high tower, with many steps leading
up to a lantern on the top. And Iván took the gentleman up there that every one
might see him.
So the gentleman took his place on the top of the tower and began to
speak, and the people came together to see him. They thought the gentleman
would really show them how to work with the head without using the hands.
But the old Devil only taught them in many words how they might live without
working. The people could make nothing of it. They looked and considered, and
at last went off to attend to their affairs.
The old Devil stood on the tower a whole day, and after that a second day,
talking all the time. But standing there so long he grew hungry, and the fools
never thought of taking food to him up in the tower. They thought that if he
could work with his head better than with his hands, he could at any rate easily
provide himself with bread.
The old Devil stood on the top of the tower yet another day, talking away.
People came near, looked on for awhile, and then went away.
And Iván asked, 'Well, has the gentleman begun to work with his head
yet?'
'Not yet,' said the people; 'he's still spouting away.'
The old Devil stood on the tower one day more, but he began to grow
weak, so that he staggered and hit his head against one of the pillars of the
lantern. One of the people noticed it and told Ivan's wife, and she ran to her
husband, who was in the field.
'Come and look,' said she. 'They say the gentleman is beginning to work
with his head.'
Iván was surprised.
'Really?' says he, and he turned his horse round, and went to the tower.
And by the time he reached the tower the old Devil was quite exhausted with
hunger, and was staggering and knocking his head against the pillars. And just
as Iván arrived at the tower, the Devil stumbled, fell, and came bump, bump,
bump, straight down the stairs to the bottom, counting each step with a knock of
his head!

105

'Well!' says Iván, 'the fine gentleman told the truth when he said that
"sometimes one's head quite splits." This is worse than blisters; after such work
there will be swellings on the head.'
The old Devil tumbled out at the foot of the stairs, and struck his head
against the ground. Iván was about to go up to him to see how much work he
had done -- when suddenly the earth opened and the old Devil fell through.
Only a hole was left.
Iván scratched his head.
'What a nasty thing,' says he. 'It's one of those devils again! What a
whopper! He must be the father of them all.'
Iván is still living, and people crowd to his kingdom. His own brothers
have come to live with him, and he feeds them, too. To every one who comes and
says 'Give me food!' Iván says, 'All right. You can stay with us; we have plenty of
everything.'
Only there is one special custom in his kingdom; whoever has horny
hands comes to table, but whoever has not, must eat what the others leave.
1885.

106

PART IV
STORIES WRITTEN TO PICTURES
9

EVIL ALLURES, BUT GOOD ENDURES
THERE lived in olden times a good and kindly man. He had this world's goods
in abundance, and many slaves to serve him. And the slaves prided themselves
on their master, saying:
'There is no better lord than ours under the sun. He feeds and clothes us
well, and gives us work suited to our strength. He bears no malice and never
speaks a harsh word to any one. He is not like other masters, who treat their
slaves worse than cattle: punishing them whether they deserve it or not, and
never giving them a friendly word. He wishes us well, does good, and speaks
kindly to us. We do not wish for a better life.'
Thus the slaves praised their lord, and the Devil, seeing it, was vexed that
slaves should live in such love and harmony with their master. So getting one of
them, whose name was Aleb, into his power, the Devil ordered him to tempt the
other slaves. And one day, when they were all sitting together resting and talking
of their master's goodness, Aleb raised his voice, and said:
'It is stupid to make so much of our master's goodness. The Devil himself
would be kind to you, if you did what he wanted. We serve our master well, and
humour him in all things. As soon as he thinks of anything, we do it: foreseeing
all his wishes. What can he do but be kind to us? Just try how it will be if, instead
of humouring him, we do him some harm instead. He will act like any one else,
and will repay evil for evil, as the worst of masters do.
The other slaves began denying what Aleb had said and at last bet with
him. Aleb undertook to make their master angry. If he failed, he was to lose his
holiday garment; but if he succeeded, the other slaves were to give him theirs.
Moreover, they promised to defend him against the master, and to set him free if
he should be put in chains or imprisoned. Having arranged this bet, Aleb agreed
to make his master angry next morning.
Aleb was a shepherd, and had in his charge a number of valuable, purebred sheep, of which his master was very fond. Next morning, when the master
brought some visitors into the inclosure to show them the valuable sheep, Aleb
winked at his companions, as if to say:
'See, now, how angry I will make him.'
All the other slaves assembled, looking in at the gates or over the fence,
and the Devil climbed a tree near by to see how his servant would do his work.
The master walked about the inclosure, showing his guests the ewes and lambs,
and presently he wished to show them his finest ram.
'All the rams are valuable,' said he, 'but I have one with closely twisted
horns, which is priceless. I prize him as the apple of my eye.'
107

Startled by the strangers, the sheep rushed about the inclosure, so that the
visitors could not get a good look at the ram. As soon as it stood still, Aleb
startled the sheep as if by accident, and they all got mixed up again. The visitors
could not make out which was the priceless ram. At last the master got tired of it.
'Aleb, dear friend,' he said, 'pray catch our best ram for me, the one with
the tightly twisted horns. Catch him very carefully, and hold him still for a
moment.'
Scarcely had the master said this, when Aleb rushed in among the sheep
like a lion, and clutched the priceless ram. Holding him fast by the wool, he
seized the left hind leg with one hand, and, before his master's eyes, lifted it and
jerked it so that it snapped like a dry branch. He had broken the ram's leg and it
fell bleating on to its knees. Then Aleb seized the right hind leg, while the left
twisted round and hung quite limp. The visitors and the slaves exclaimed in
dismay, and the Devil, sitting up in the tree, rejoiced that Aleb had done his task
so cleverly. The master looked as black as thunder, frowned, bent his head, and
did not say a word. The visitors and the slaves were silent, too, waiting to see
what would follow. After remaining silent for a while, the master shook himself
as if to throw off some burden. Then he lifted his head, and raising his eyes
heavenward, remained so for a short time. Presently the wrinkles passed from
his face, and he looked down at Aleb with a smile saying:
'Oh, Aleb, Aleb! Your master bade you anger me; but my master is
stronger than yours. I am not angry with you, but I will make your master angry.
You are afraid that I shall punish you, and you have been wishing for your
freedom. Know, then, Aleb, that I shall not punish you; but, as you wish to be
free, here, before my guests, I set you free. Go where you like, and take your
holiday garment with you!'
And the kind master returned with his guests to the house; but the Devil,
grinding his teeth, fell down from the tree, and sank through the ground.
1885.

108

10

LITTLE GIRLS WISER THAN MEN
IT was an early Easter. Sledging was only just over; snow still lay in the yards;
and water ran in streams down the village street.
Two little girls from different houses happened to meet in a lane between
two homesteads, where the dirty water after running through the farm-yards
had formed a large puddle. One girl was very small, the other a little bigger.
Their mothers had dressed them both in new frocks. The little one wore a blue
frock the other a yellow print, and both had red kerchiefs on their heads. They
had just come from church when they met, and first they showed each other their
finery, and then they began to play. Soon the fancy took them to splash about in
the water, and the smaller one was going to step into the puddle, shoes and all,
when the elder checked her:
'Don't go in so, Malásha,' said she, 'your mother will scold you. I will take
off my shoes and stockings, and you take off yours.'
They did so, and then, picking up their skirts, began walking towards
each other through the puddle. The water came up to Malásha's ankles, and she
said:
'It is deep, Akoúlya, I'm afraid!'
'Come on,' replied the other. 'Don't be frightened. It won't get any deeper.'
When they got near one another, Akoúlya said:
'Mind, Malásha, don't splash. Walk carefully!'
She had hardly said this, when Malásha plumped down her foot so that
the water splashed right on to Akoúlya's frock. The frock was splashed, and so
were Akoúlya's eyes and nose. When she saw the stains on her frock, she was
angry and ran after Malásha to strike her. Malásha was frightened, and seeing
that she had got herself into trouble, she scrambled out of the puddle, and
prepared to run home. Just then Akoúlya's mother happened to be passing, and
seeing that her daughter's skirt was splashed, and her sleeves dirty, she said:
'You naughty, dirty girl, what have you been doing?'
'Malásha did it on purpose,' replied the girl.
At this Akoúlya's mother seized Malásha, and struck her on the back of
her neck. Malásha began to howl so that she could be heard all down the street.
Her mother came out.
'What are you beating my girl for?' said she; and began scolding her
neighbour. One word led to another and they had an angry quarrel. The men
came out and a crowd collected in the street, every one shouting and no one
listening. They all went on quarrelling, till one gave another a push, and the
affair had very nearly come to blows, when Akoúlya's old grandmother,
stepping in among them, tried to calm them.
'What are you thinking of, friends? Is it right to behave so? On a day like
this, too! It is a time for rejoicing, and not for such folly as this.'
They would not listen to the old woman and nearly knocked her off her
feet. And she would not have been able to quiet the crowd, if it had not been for
109

Akoúlya and Malásha themselves. While the women were abusing each other,
Akoúlya had wiped the mud off her frock, and gone back to the puddle. She took
a stone and began scraping away the earth in front of the puddle to make a
channel through which the water could run out into the street. Presently Malásha
joined her, and with a chip of wood helped her dig the channel. Just as the men
were beginning to fight, the water from the little girls' channel ran streaming into
the street towards the very place where the old woman was trying to pacify the
men. The girls followed it; one running each side of the little stream.
'Catch it, Malásha! Catch it!' shouted Akoúlya; while Malásha could not
speak for laughing.
Highly delighted, and watching the chip float along on their stream, the
little girls ran straight into the group of men; and the old woman, seeing them,
said to the men:
'Are you not ashamed of yourselves? To go fighting on account of these
lassies, when they themselves have forgotten all about it, and are playing happily
together. Dear little souls! They are wiser than you!'
The men looked at the little girls, and were ashamed, and, laughing at
themselves, went back each to his own home.
'Except ye turn, and become as little children, ye shall in no wise enter into
the kingdom of heaven.'
1885.

110

11

ILYÁS
THERE once lived, in the Government of Oufá a Bashkír named Ilyás. His father,
who died a year after he had found his son a wife, did not leave him much
property. Ilyás then had only seven mares, two cows, and about a score of sheep.
He was a good manager, however, and soon began to acquire more. He and his
wife worked from morn till night; rising earlier than others and going later to
bed; and his possessions increased year by year. Living in this way, Ilyás little by
little acquired great wealth. At the end of thirty-five years he had 200 horses, 150
head of cattle, and 1,200 sheep. Hired labourers tended his flocks and herds, and
hired women milked his mares and cows, and made kumiss17, butter and cheese.
Ilyás had abundance of everything, and every one in the district envied him.
They said of him:
'Ilyás is a fortunate man: he has plenty of everything. This world must be a
pleasant place for him.'
People of position heard of Ilyás and sought his acquaintance. Visitors
came to him from afar; and he welcomed every one, and gave them food and
drink. Whoever might come, there was always kumiss, tea, sherbet, and mutton
to set before them. Whenever visitors arrived a sheep would be killed, or
sometimes two; and if many guests came he would even slaughter a mare for
them.
Ilyás had three children: two sons and a daughter; and he married them
all off. While he was poor, his sons worked with him, and looked after the flocks
and herds themselves; but when he grew rich they got spoiled and one of them
took to drink. The eldest was killed in a brawl; and the younger, who had
married a self-willed woman, ceased to obey his father, and they could not live
together any more.
So they parted, and Ilyás gave his son a house and some of the cattle; and
this diminished his wealth. Soon after that, a disease broke out among Ilyás's
sheep, and many died. Then followed a bad harvest, and the hay crop failed; and
many cattle died that winter. Then the Kirghíz captured his best herd of horses;
and Ilyás's property dwindled away. It became smaller and smaller, while at the
same time his strength grew less; till, by the time he was seventy years old, he
had begun to sell his furs, carpets, saddles, and tents. At last he had to part with
his remaining cattle, and found himself face to face with want. Before he knew
how it had happened, he had lost everything, and in their old age he and his wife
had to go into service. Ilyás had nothing left, except the clothes on his back, a fur
cloak, a cup, his indoor shoes and overshoes, and his wife, Sham-Shemagi, who
also was old by this time. The son who had parted from him had gone into a far
country, and his daughter was dead, so that there was no one to help the old
couple.

17Kumiss (or more properly koumys) is a fermented drink prepared from mare's milk.

111

Their neighbour, Muhammad-Shah, took pity on them. Muhammad-Shah
was neither rich nor poor, but lived comfortably, and was a good man. He
remembered Ilyás's hospitality, and pitying him, said:
'Come and live with me, Ilyás, you and your old woman. In summer you
can work in my melon-garden as much as your strength allows, and in winter
feed my cattle; and Sham-Shemagi shall milk my mares and make kumiss. I will
feed and clothe you both. When you need anything, tell me, and you shall have
it.'
Ilyás thanked his neighbour, and he and his wife took service with
Muhammad-Shah as labourers. At first the position seemed hard to them, but
they got used to it, and lived on, working as much as their strength allowed.
Muhammad-Shah found it was to his advantage to keep such people,
because, having been masters themselves, they knew how to manage and were
not lazy, but did all the work they could. Yet it grieved Muhammad-Shah to see
people brought so low who had been of such high standing.
It happened once that some of Muhammad-Shah's relatives came from a
great distance to visit him, and a Mullah came too. Muhammad-Shah told Ilyás
to catch a sheep and kill it. Ilyás skinned the sheep, and boiled it, and sent it in to
the guests. The guests ate the mutton, had some tea, and then began drinking
kumiss. As they were sitting with their host on down cushions on a carpet,
conversing and sipping kumiss from their cups, Ilyás, having finished his work
passed by the open door. Muhammad-Shah, seeing him pass, said to one of the
guests:
'Did you notice that old man who passed just now?'
'Yes,' said the visitor, 'what is there remarkable about him?'
'Only this -- that he was once the richest man among us,' replied the host.
'His name is Ilyás. You may have heard of him.'
'Of course I have heard of him,' the guest answered 'I never saw him
before, but his fame has spread far and wide.'
'Yes, and now he has nothing left,' said Muhammad-Shah, 'and he lives
with me as my labourer, and his old woman is here too -- she milks the mares.'
The guest was astonished: he clicked with his tongue, shook his head, and
said:
'Fortune turns like a wheel. One man it lifts, another it sets down! Does
not the old man grieve over all he has lost?'
'Who can tell. He lives quietly and peacefully, and works well.'
'May I speak to him?' asked the guest. 'I should like to ask him about his
life.'
'Why not?' replied the master, and he called from the kibítka18 in which
they were sitting:
'Babay;' (which in the Bashkir tongue means 'Grandfather ') 'come in and
have a cup of kumiss with us, and call your wife here also.'
Ilyás entered with his wife; and after exchanging greetings with his master
and the guests, he repeated a prayer, and seated himself near the door. His wife
passed in behind the curtain and sat down with her mistress.
18A kibitk is a movable dwelling, made up of detachable wooden frames, forming a round, and

covered over with felt.

112

A Cap of kumiss was handed to Ilyás; he wished the guests and his master
good health, bowed, drank a little, and put down the cup.
'Well, Daddy,' said the guest who had wished to speak to him, 'I suppose
you feel rather sad at the sight of us. It must remind you of your former
prosperity, and of your present sorrows.'
Ilyás smiled, and said:
'If I were to tell you what is happiness and what is misfortune, you would
not believe me. You had better ask my wife. She is a woman, and what is in her
heart is on her tongue. She will tell you the whole truth.'
The guest turned towards the curtain.
'Well, Granny,' he cried, 'tell me how your former happiness compares
with your present misfortune.'
And Sham-Shemagi answered from behind the curtain:
'This is what I think about it: My old man and I lived for fifty years
seeking happiness and not finding it; and it is only now, these last two years,
since we had nothing left and have lived as labourers, that we have found real
happiness, and we wish for nothing better than our present lot.'
The guests were astonished, and so was the master; he even rose and drew
the curtain back, so as to see the old woman's face. There she stood with her arms
folded, looking at her old husband, and smiling; and he smiled back at her. The
old woman went on:
'I speak the truth and do not jest. For half a century we sought for
happiness, and as long as we were rich we never found it. Now that we have
nothing left, and have taken service as labourers, we have found such happiness
that we want nothing better.'
'But in what does your happiness consist?' asked the guest.
'Why, in this,' she replied, 'when we were rich my husband and I had so
many cares that we had no time to talk to one another, or to think of our souls, or
to pray to God. Now we had visitors, and had to consider what food to set before
them, and what presents to give them, lest they should speak ill of us. When they
left, we had to look after our labourers who were always trying to shirk work
and get the best food, while we wanted to get all we could out of them. So we
sinned. Then we were in fear lest a wolf should kill a foal or a calf, or thieves
steal our horses. We lay awake at night, worrying lest the ewes should overlie
their lambs, and we got up again and again to see that all was well. One thing
attended to, another care would spring up: how, for instance, to get enough
fodder for the winter. And besides that, my old man and I used to disagree. He
would say we must do so and so, and I would differ from him; and then we
disputed -- sinning again. So we passed from one trouble to another, from one
sin to another, and found no happiness.'
'Well, and now?'
'Now, when my husband and I wake in the morning, we always have a
loving word for one another and we live peacefully, having nothing to quarrel
about. We have no care but how best to serve our master. We work as much as
our strength allows and do it with a will, that our master may not lose but profit
by us. When we come in, dinner or supper is ready and there is kumiss to drink.
We have fuel to burn when it is cold and we have our fur cloak. And we have
113

time to talk, time to think of our souls, and time to pray. For fifty years we
sought happiness, but only now at last have we found it.'
The guests laughed.
But Ilyás said:
'Do not laugh, friends. It is not a matter for jesting -- it is the truth of life.
We also were foolish at first, and wept at the loss of our wealth; but now God has
shown us the truth, and we tell it, not for our own consolation, but for your
good.'
And the Mullah said:
'That is a wise speech. Ilyás has spoken the exact truth. The same is said in
Holy Writ.'
And the guests ceased laughing and became thoughtful.
1885.

114

PART V
FOLK-TALES RETOLD
12

THE THREE HERMITS
AN OLD LEGEND CURRENT IN THE VOLGA DISTRICT
'And in praying use not vain repetitions, as the Gentiles do: for they think
that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not therefore like unto them:
for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask Him.' -- Matt.
vi. 7, 8.
A BISHOP was sailing from Archangel to the Solovétsk Monastery; and on the
same vessel were a number of pilgrims on their way to visit the shrines at that
place. The voyage was a smooth one. The wind favourable, and the weather fair.
The pilgrims lay on deck, eating, or sat in groups talking to one another. The
Bishop, too, came on deck, and as he was pacing up and down, he noticed a
group of men standing near the prow and listening to a fisherman who was
pointing to the sea and telling them something. The Bishop stopped, and looked
in the direction in which the man was pointing. He could see nothing however,
but the sea glistening in the sunshine. He drew nearer to listen, but when the
man saw him, he took off his cap and was silent. The rest of the people also took
off their caps, and bowed.
'Do not let me disturb you, friends,' said the Bishop. 'I came to hear what
this good man was saying.'
'The fisherman was telling us about the hermits,' replied one, a tradesman,
rather bolder than the rest.
'What hermits?' asked the Bishop, going to the side of the vessel and
seating himself on a box. 'Tell me about them. I should like to hear. What were
you pointing at?'
'Why, that little island you can just see over there,' answered the man,
pointing to a spot ahead and a little to the right. 'That is the island where the
hermits live for the salvation of their souls.'
'Where is the island?' asked the Bishop. 'I see nothing.'
'There, in the distance, if you will please look along my hand. Do you see
that little cloud? Below it and a bit to the left, there is just a faint streak. That is
the island.'
The Bishop looked carefully, but his unaccustomed eyes could make out
nothing but the water shimmering in the sun.
'I cannot see it,' he said. 'But who are the hermits that live there?'
'They are holy men,' answered the fisherman. 'I had long heard tell of
them, but never chanced to see them myself till the year before last.'
115

And the fisherman related how once, when he was out fishing, he had
been stranded at night upon that island, not knowing where he was. In the
morning, as he wandered about the island, he came across an earth hut, and met
an old man standing near it. Presently two others came out, and after having fed
him, and dried his things, they helped him mend his boat.
'And what are they like?' asked the Bishop.
'One is a small man and his back is bent. He wears a priest's cassock and is
very old; he must be more than a hundred, I should say. He is so old that the
white of his beard is taking a greenish tinge, but he is always smiling, and his
face is as bright as an angel's from heaven. The second is taller, but he also is very
old. He wears tattered, peasant coat. His beard is broad, and of a yellowish grey
colour. He is a strong man. Before I had time to help him, he turned my boat over
as if it were only a pail. He too, is kindly and cheerful. The third is tall, and has a
beard as white as snow and reaching to his knees. He is stern, with over-hanging
eyebrows; and he wears nothing but a mat tied round his waist.'
'And did they speak to you?' asked the Bishop.
'For the most part they did everything in silence and spoke but little even
to one another. One of them would just give a glance, and the others would
understand him. I asked the tallest whether they had lived there long. He
frowned, and muttered something as if he were angry; but the oldest one took
his hand and smiled, and then the tall one was quiet. The oldest one only said:
"Have mercy upon us," and smiled.'
While the fisherman was talking, the ship had drawn nearer to the island.
'There, now you can see it plainly, if your Grace will please to look,' said
the tradesman, pointing with his hand.
The Bishop looked, and now he really saw a dark streak -- which was the
island. Having looked at it a while, he left the prow of the vessel, and going to
the stern, asked the helmsman:
'What island is that?'
'That one,' replied the man, 'has no name. There are many such in this sea.'
'Is it true that there are hermits who live there for the salvation of their
souls?'
'So it is said, your Grace, but I don't know if it's true. Fishermen say they
have seen them; but of course they may only be spinning yarns.'
'I should like to land on the island and see these men,' said the Bishop.
'How could I manage it?'
'The ship cannot get close to the island,' replied the helmsman, 'but you
might be rowed there in a boat. You had better speak to the captain.'
The captain was sent for and came.
'I should like to see these hermits,' said the Bishop. 'Could I not be rowed
ashore?'
The captain tried to dissuade him.
'Of course it could be done,' said he, 'but we should lose much time. And
if I might venture to say so to your Grace, the old men are not worth your pains. I
have heard say that they are foolish old fellows, who understand nothing, and
never speak a word, any more than the fish in the sea.'
116

'I wish to see them,' said the Bishop, 'and I will pay you for your trouble
and loss of time. Please let me have a boat.'
There was no help for it; so the order was given. The sailors trimmed the
sails, the steersman put up the helm, and the ship's course was set for the island.
A chair was placed at the prow for the Bishop, and he sat there, looking ahead.
The passengers all collected at the prow, and gazed at the island. Those who had
the sharpest eyes could presently make out the rocks on it, and then a mud hut
was seen. At last one man saw the hermits themselves. The captain brought a
telescope and, after looking through it, handed it to the Bishop.
'It's right enough. There are three men standing on the shore. There, a little
to the right of that big rock.'
The Bishop took the telescope, got it into position, and he saw the three
men: a tall one, a shorter one, and one very small and bent, standing on the shore
and holding each other by the hand.
The captain turned to the Bishop.
'The vessel can get no nearer in than this, your Grace. If you wish to go
ashore, we must ask you to go in the boat, while we anchor here.'
The cable was quickly let out, the anchor cast, and the sails furled. There
was a jerk, and the vessel shook. Then a boat having been lowered, the oarsmen
jumped in, and the Bishop descended the ladder and took his seat. The men
pulled at their oars, and the boat moved rapidly towards the island. When they
came within a stone's throw they saw three old men: a tall one with only a mat
tied round his waist: a shorter one in a tattered peasant coat, and a very old one
bent with age and wearing an old cassock -- all three standing hand in hand.
The oarsmen pulled in to the shore, and held on with the boathook while
the Bishop got out.
The old men bowed to him, and he gave them his benediction, at which
they bowed still lower. Then the Bishop began to speak to them.
'I have heard,' he said, 'that you, godly men, live here saving your own
souls, and praying to our Lord Christ for your fellow men. I, an unworthy
servant of Christ, am called, by God's mercy, to keep and teach His flock. I
wished to see you, servants of God, and to do what I can to teach you, also.'
The old men looked at each other smiling, but remained silent.
'Tell me,' said the Bishop, 'what you are doing to save your souls, and how
you serve God on this island.'
The second hermit sighed, and looked at the oldest, the very ancient one.
The latter smiled, and said:
'We do not know how to serve God. We only serve and support ourselves,
servant of God.'
'But how do you pray to God?' asked the Bishop.
'We pray in this way,' replied the hermit. 'Three are ye, three are we, have
mercy upon us.'
And when the old man said this, all three raised their eyes to heaven, and
repeated:
'Three are ye, three are we, have mercy upon us!'
The Bishop smiled.
117

'You have evidently heard something about the Holy Trinity,' said he. 'But
you do not pray aright. You have won my affection, godly men. I see you wish to
please the Lord, but you do not know how to serve Him. That is not the way to
pray; but listen to me, and I will teach you. I will teach you, not a way of my
own, but the way in which God in the Holy Scriptures has commanded all men
to pray to Him.'
And the Bishop began explaining to the hermits how God had revealed
Himself to men; telling them of God the Father, and God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost.
'God the Son came down on earth,' said he, 'to save men, and this is how
He taught us all to pray. Listen and repeat after me: "Our Father."'
And the first old man repeated after him, 'Our Father,' and the second
said, 'Our Father,' and the third said, 'Our Father.'
'Which art in heaven,' continued the Bishop.
The first hermit repeated, 'Which art in heaven,' but the second blundered
over the words, and the tall hermit could not say them properly. His hair had
grown over his mouth so that he could not speak plainly. The very old hermit,
having no teeth, also mumbled indistinctly.
The Bishop repeated the words again, and the old men repeated them
after him. The Bishop sat down on a stone, and the old men stood before him,
watching his mouth, and repeating the words as he uttered them. And all day
long the Bishop laboured, saying a word twenty, thirty, a hundred times over,
and the old men repeated it after him. They blundered, and he corrected them,
and made them begin again.
The Bishop did not leave off till he had taught them the whole of the
Lord's prayer so that they could not only repeat it after him, but could say it by
themselves. The middle one was the first to know it, and to repeat the whole of it
alone. The Bishop made him say it again and again, and at last the others could
say it too.
It was getting dark, and the moon was appearing over the water, before
the Bishop rose to return to the vessel. When he took leave of the old men, they
all bowed down to the ground before him. He raised them, and kissed each of
them, telling them to pray as he had taught them. Then he got into the boat and
returned to the ship.
And as he sat in the boat and was rowed to the ship he could hear the
three voices of the hermits loudly repeating the Lord's prayer. As the boat drew
near the vessel their voices could no longer be heard, but they could still be seen
in the moonlight, standing as he had left them on the shore, the shortest in the
middle, the tallest on the right, the middle one on the left. As soon as the Bishop
had reached the vessel and got on board, the anchor was weighed and the sails
unfurled. The wind filled them, and the ship sailed away, and the Bishop took a
seat in the stern and watched the island they had left. For a time he could still see
the hermits, but presently they disappeared from sight, though the island was
still visible. At last it too vanished, and only the sea was to be seen, rippling in
the moonlight.
The pilgrims lay down to sleep, and all was quiet on deck. The Bishop did
not wish to sleep, but sat alone at the stern, gazing at the sea where the island
118

was no longer visible, and thinking of the good old men. He thought how
pleased they had been to learn the Lord's prayer; and he thanked God for having
sent him to teach and help such godly men.
So the Bishop sat, thinking, and gazing at the sea where the island had
disappeared. And the moonlight flickered before his eyes, sparkling, now here,
now there, upon the waves. Suddenly he saw something white and shining, on
the bright path which the moon cast across the sea. Was it a seagull, or the little
gleaming sail of some small boat? The Bishop fixed his eyes on it, wondering.
'It must be a boat sailing after us,' thought he 'but it is overtaking us very
rapidly. It was far, far away a minute ago, but now it is much nearer. It cannot be
a boat, for I can see no sail; but whatever it may be, it is following us, and
catching us up.'
And he could not make out what it was. Not a boat, nor a bird, nor a fish!
It was too large for a man, and besides a man could not be out there in the midst
of the sea. The Bishop rose, and said to the helmsman:
'Look there, what is that, my friend? What is it?' the Bishop repeated,
though he could now see plainly what it was -- the three hermits running upon
the water, all gleaming white, their grey beards shining, and approaching the
ship as quickly as though it were not morning.
The steersman looked and let go the helm in terror.
'Oh Lord! The hermits are running after us on the water as though it were
dry land!'
The passengers hearing him, jumped up, and crowded to the stern. They
saw the hermits coming along hand in hand, and the two outer ones beckoning
the ship to stop. All three were gliding along upon the water without moving
their feet. Before the ship could be stopped, the hermits had reached it, and
raising their heads, all three as with one voice, began to say:
'We have forgotten your teaching, servant of God. As long as we kept
repeating it we remembered, but when we stopped saying it for a time, a word
dropped out, and now it has all gone to pieces. We can remember nothing of it.
Teach us again.'
The Bishop crossed himself, and leaning over the ship's side, said:
'Your own prayer will reach the Lord, men of God. It is not for me to teach
you. Pray for us sinners.
And the Bishop bowed low before the old men; and they turned and went
back across the sea. And a light shone until daybreak on the spot where they
were lost to sight.
1886.

119

13

THE IMP AND THE CRUST
A POOR peasant set out early one morning to plough, taking with him for his
breakfast a crust of bread. He got his plough ready, wrapped the bread in his
coat, put it under a bush, and set to work. After a while when his horse was tired
and he was hungry, the peasant fixed the plough, let the horse loose to graze and
went to get his coat and his breakfast
He lifted the coat, but the bread was gone! He looked and looked, turned
the coat over, shook it out -- but the bread was gone. The peasant could not
make this out at all.
'That's strange,' thought he; 'I saw no one, but all the same some one has
been here and has taken the bread!'
It was an imp who had stolen the bread while the peasant was ploughing,
and at that moment he was sitting behind the bush, waiting to hear the peasant
swear and call on the Devil.
The peasant was sorry to lose his breakfast, but 'It can't be helped,' said he.
'After all, I shan't die of hunger! No doubt whoever took the bread needed it.
May it do him good!'
And he went to the well, had a drink of water, and rested a bit. Then he
caught his horse, harnessed it, and began ploughing again.
The imp was crestfallen at not having made the peasant sin, and he went
to report what had happened to the Devil, his master.
He came to the Devil and told how he had taken the peasant's bread, and
how the peasant instead of cursing had said, 'May it do him good!'
The Devil was angry, and replied: 'If the man got the better of you, it was
your own fault -- you don't understand your business! If the peasants, and their
wives after them, take to that sort of thing, it will be all up with us. The matter
can't be left like that! Go back at once,' said he, 'and put things right. If in three
years you don't get the better of that peasant, I'll have you ducked in holy water!'
The imp was frightened. He scampered back to earth, thinking how he
could redeem his fault. He thought and thought, and at last hit upon a good plan.
He turned himself into a labouring man, and went and took service with
the poor peasant. The first year he advised the peasant to sow corn in a marshy
place. The peasant took his advice, and sowed in the marsh. The year turned out
a very dry one, and the crops of the other peasants were all scorched by the sun,
but the poor peasant's corn grew thick and tall and full-eared. Not only had he
grain enough to last him for the whole year, but he had much left over besides.
The next year the imp advised the peasant to sow on the hill; and it turned
out a wet summer. Other people's corn was beaten down and rotted and the ears
did not fill; but the peasant's crop, up on the hill, was a fine one. He had more
grain left over than before, so that he did not know what to do with it all.
Then the imp showed the peasant how he could mash the grain and distil
spirit from it; and the peasant made strong drink, and began to drink it himself
and to give it to his friends.
120

So the imp went to the Devil, his master, and boasted that he had made up
for his failure. The Devil said that he would come and see for himself how the
case stood.
He came to the peasant's house, and saw that the peasant had invited his
well-to-do neighbours and was treating them to drink. His wife was offering the
drink to the guests, and as she handed it round she tumbled against the table and
spilt a glassful.
The peasant was angry, and scolded his wife: 'What do you mean, you
slut? Do you think it's ditchwater, you cripple, that you must go pouring good
stuff like that over the floor?'
The imp nudged the Devil, his master, with his elbow: 'See,' said he, 'that's
the man who did not grudge his last crust!'
The peasant, still railing at his wife, began to carry the drink round
himself. Just then a poor peasant returning from work came in uninvited. He
greeted the company, sat down, and saw that they were drinking. Tired with his
day's work he felt that he too would like a drop. He sat and sat, and his mouth
kept watering, but the host instead of offering him any only muttered: 'I can't
find drink for every one who comes along.'
This pleased the Devil; but the imp chuckled and said, 'Wait a bit, there's
more to come yet!'
The rich peasants drank, and their host drank too. And they began to
make false, oily speeches to one another.
The Devil listened and listened, and praised the imp.
'If,' said he, 'the drink makes them so foxy that they begin to cheat each
other, they will soon all be in our hands.'
'Wait for what's coming,' said the imp. 'Let them have another glass all
round. Now they are like foxes, wagging their tails and trying to get round one
another; but presently you will see them like savage wolves.'
The peasants had another glass each, and their talk became wilder and
rougher. Instead of oily speeches they began to abuse and snarl at one another.
Soon they took to fighting, and punched one another's noses. And the host joined
in the fight, and he too got well beaten.
The Devil looked on and was much pleased at all this. 'This is first-rate!'
said he.
But the imp replied: 'Wait a bit -- the best is yet to come. Wait till they
have had a third glass. Now they are raging like wolves, but let them have one
more glass, and they will be like swine.'
The peasants had their third glass, and became quite like brutes. They
muttered and shouted, not knowing why, and not listening to one another.
Then the party began to break up. Some went alone, some in twos, and
some in threes, all staggering down the street. The host went out to speed his
guests, but he fell on his nose into a puddle, smeared himself from top to toe, and
lay there grunting like a hog.
This pleased the Devil still more.
'Well,' said he, 'you have hit on a first-rate drink, and have quite made up
for your blunder about the bread. But now tell me how this drink is made. You
must first have put in fox's blood: that was what made the peasants sly as foxes.
121

Then, I suppose, you added wolf's blood: that is what made them fierce like
wolves. And you must have finished off with swine's blood, to make them
behave like swine.'
'No,' said the imp, 'that was not the way I did it. All I did was to see that
the peasant had more corn than he needed. The blood of the beasts is always in
man; but as long as he has only enough corn for his needs, it is kept in bounds.
While that was the case, the peasant did not grudge his last crust. But when he
had corn left over, he looked for ways of getting pleasure out of it. And I showed
him a pleasure -- drinking! And when he began to turn God's good gifts into
spirits for his own pleasure -- the fox's, wolf's and swine's blood in him all came
out. If only he goes on drinking, he will always be a beast!'
The Devil praised the imp, forgave him for his former blunder, and
advanced him to a post of high honour.
1886.

122

14

HOW MUCH LAND DOES A MAN NEED?
I
AN elder sister came to visit her younger sister in the country. The elder was
married to a tradesman in town, the younger to a peasant in the village. As the
sisters sat over their tea talking, the elder began to boast of the advantages of
town life: saying how comfortably they lived there, how well they dressed, what
fine clothes her children wore what good things they ate and drank, and how she
went to the theatre, promenades, and entertainments.
The younger sister was piqued, and in turn disparage the life of a
tradesman, and stood up for that of a peasant.
'I would not change my way of life for yours,' said she. We may live
roughly, but at least we are free from anxiety. You live in better style than we do
but though you often earn more than you need, you are very likely to lose all you
have. You know the proverb, "Loss and gain are brothers twain." It often
happens that people who are wealthy one day are begging their bread the next.
Our way is safer. Though a peasant's life is not a fat one, it is a long one. We shall
never grow rich, but we shall always have enough to eat.'
The elder sister said sneeringly:
'Enough? Yes, if you like to share with the pigs and the calves! What do
you know of elegance or manners! However much your goodman may slave,
you will die as you are living -- on a dung heap -- and your children the same.'
'Well, what of that?' replied the younger. 'Of course our work is rough and
coarse. But, on the other hand, it is sure; and we need not bow to any one. But
you, in your towns, are surrounded by temptations; to-day all may be right, but
to-morrow the Evil One may tempt your husband with cards, wine, or women,
and all will go to ruin. Don't such things happen often enough?'
Pahóm, the master of the house, was lying on the top of the oven, and he
listened to the women's chatter.
'It is perfectly true,' thought he. 'Busy as we are from childhood tilling
mother earth, we peasants have no time to let any nonsense settle in our heads.
Our only trouble is that we haven't land enough. If I had plenty of land, I
shouldn't fear the Devil himself!'
The women finished their tea, chatted a while about dress, and then
cleared away the tea-things and lay down to sleep.
But the Devil had been sitting behind the oven, and had heard all that was
said. He was pleased that the peasant's wife had led her husband into boasting,
and that he had said that if he had plenty of land he would not fear the Devil
himself.
'All right,' thought the Devil. 'We will have a tussle. I'll give you land
enough; and by means of that land I will get you into my power.'
II
123

Close to the village there lived a lady, a small landowner, who had an
estate of about three hundred acres19. She had always lived on good terms with
the peasants, until she engaged as her steward an old soldier, who took to
burdening the people with fines. However careful Pahóm tried to be, it happened
again and again that now a horse of his got among the lady's oats, now a cow
strayed into her garden, now his calves found their way into her meadows -- and
he always had to pay a fine.
Pahóm paid up, but grumbled, and, going home in a temper, was rough
with his family. All through that summer, Pahóm had much trouble because of
this steward; and he was even glad when winter came and the cattle had to be
stabled. Though he grudged the fodder when they could no longer graze on the
pasture-land, at least he was free from anxiety about them.
In the winter the news got about that the lady was going to sell her land,
and that the keeper of the inn on the high road was bargaining for it. When the
peasants heard this they were very much alarmed.
'Well', thought they, 'if the innkeeper gets the land, he will worry us with
fines worse than the lady's steward. We all depend on that estate.'
So the peasants went on behalf of their Commune and asked the lady not
to sell the land to the innkeeper offering her a better price for it themselves. The
lady agreed to let them have it. Then the peasants tried to arrange for the
Commune to buy the whole estate so that it might be held by them all in
common. They met twice to discuss it, but could not settle the matter; the Evil
One sowed discord among them, and they could not agree. So they decided to
buy the land individually, each according to his means; and the lady agreed to
this plan as she had to the other.
Presently Pahóm heard that a neighbour of his was buying fifty acres, and
that the lady had consented to accept one half in cash and to wait a year for the
other half. Pahóm felt envious
'Look at that,' thought he, 'the land is all being sold, and I shall get none of
it.' So he spoke to his wife.
'Other people are buying,' said he, 'and we must also buy twenty acres or
so. Life is becoming impossible. That steward is simply crushing us with his
fines.'
So they put their heads together and considered how they could manage
to buy it. They had one hundred roubles laid by. They sold a colt, and one half of
their bees; hired out one of their sons as a labourer, and took his wages in
advance; borrowed the rest from a brother-in-law, and so scraped together half
the purchase money.
Having done this, Pahóm chose out a farm of forty acres, some of it
wooded, and went to the lady to bargain for it. They came to an agreement, and
he shook hands with her upon it, and paid her a deposit in advance. Then they
went to town and signed the deeds; he paying half the price down, and
undertaking to pay the remainder within two years.

19120 desyatins. The desyatina is properly 2.7 acres; but in this story round numbers are used.

124

So now Pahóm had land of his own. He borrowed seed, and sowed it on
the land he had bought. The harvest was a good one, and within a year he had
managed to pay off his debts both to the lady and to his brother-in-law. So he
became a landowner, ploughing and sowing his own land, making hay on his
own land, cutting his own trees, and feeding his cattle on his own pasture. When
he went out to plough his fields, or to look at his growing corn, or at his grassmeadows, his heart would fill with joy. The grass that grew and the flowers that
bloomed there, seemed to him unlike any that grew elsewhere. Formerly, when
he had passed by that land it had appeared the same as any other land, but now
it seemed quite different.
III
So Pahóm was well-contented, and everything would have been right if
the neighbouring peasants would only not have trespassed on his corn-fields and
meadows. He appealed to them most civilly, but they still went on: now the
Communal herdsmen would let the village cows stray into his meadows; then
horses from the night pasture would get among his corn. Pahóm turned them out
again and again, and forgave their owners, and for a long time he forbore from
prosecuting any one. But at last he lost patience and complained to the District
Court. He knew it was the peasants' want of land, and no evil intent on their
part, that caused the trouble; but he thought:
'I cannot go on overlooking it, or they will destroy all I have. They must be
taught a lesson.'
So he had them up, gave them one lesson, and then another, and two or
three of the peasants were fined. After a time Pahóm's neighbours began to bear
him a grudge for this, and would now and then let their cattle on to his land on
purpose. One peasant even got into Pahóm's wood at night and cut down five
young lime trees for their bark. Pahóm passing through the wood one day
noticed something white. He came nearer, and saw the stripped trunks lying on
the ground, and close by stood the stumps, where the trees had been. Pahóm was
furious.
'If he had only cut one here and there it would have been bad enough,'
thought Pahóm, 'but the rascal has actually cut down a whole clump. If I could
only find out who did this, I would pay him out.'
He racked his brains as to who it could be. Finally he decided: 'It must be
Simon -- no one else could have done it.' So he went to Simon's homestead to
have a look round, but he found nothing, and only had an angry scene.
However, he now felt more certain than ever that Simon had done it, and he
lodged a complaint. Simon was summoned. The case was tried, and re-tried, and
at the end of it all Simon was acquitted, there being no evidence against him.
Pahóm felt still more aggrieved, and let his anger loose upon the Elder and the
Judges.
'You let thieves grease your palms,' said he. 'If you were honest folk
yourselves, you would not let a thief go free.'

125

So Pahóm quarrelled with the Judges and with his neighbours. Threats to
burn his building began to be uttered. So though Pahóm had more land, his place
in the Commune was much worse than before.
About this time a rumour got about that many people were moving to
new parts.
'There's no need for me to leave my land,' thought Pahóm. 'But some of
the others might leave our village and then there would be more room for us. I
would take over their land myself, and make my estate a bit bigger. I could then
live more at ease. As it is, I am still too cramped to be comfortable.
One day Pahóm was sitting at home, when a peasant, passing through the
village, happened to call in. He was allowed to stay the night, and supper was
given him. Pahóm had a talk with this peasant and asked him where he came
from. The stranger answered that he came from beyond the Volga, where he had
been working. One word led to another, and the man went on to say that many
people were settling in those parts. He told how some people from his village
had settled there. They had joined the Commune, and had had twenty-five acres
per man granted them. The land was so good, he said, that the rye sown on it
grew as high as a horse, and so thick that five cuts of a sickle made a sheaf. One
peasant, he said, had brought nothing with him but his bare hands, and now he
had six horses and two cows of his own.
Pahóm's heart kindled with desire. He thought:
'Why should I suffer in this narrow hole, if one can live so well elsewhere?
I will sell my land and my homestead here, and with the money I will start afresh
over there and get everything new. In this crowded place one is always having
trouble. But I must first go and find out all about it myself.
Towards summer he got ready and started. He went down the Volga on a
steamer to Samára, then walked another three hundred miles on foot, and at last
reached the place. It was just as the stranger had said. The peasants had plenty of
land: every man had twenty-five acres of Communal land given him for his use,
and any one who had money could buy, besides, at two shillings an acre20 as
much good freehold land as he wanted.
Having found out all he wished to know, Pahóm returned home as
autumn came on, and began selling off his belongings. He sold his land at a
profit, sold his homestead and all his cattle, and withdrew from membership of
the Commune. He only waited till the spring, and then started with his family for
the new settlement.
IV
As soon as Pahóm and his family arrived at their new abode, he applied
for admission into the Commune of a large village. He stood treat to the Elders,
and obtained the necessary documents. Five shares of Communal land were
given him for his own and his sons' use: that is to say -- 125 acres (not all together
but in different fields) besides the use of the Communal pasture. Pahóm put up
the buildings he needed, and bought cattle. Of the Communal land alone he had
20Three roubles per desyatina.

126

three times as much as at his former home, and the land was good corn-land. He
was ten times better off than he had been. He had plenty of arable land and
pasturage, and could keep as many head of cattle as he liked.
At first, in the bustle of building and settling down, Pahóm was pleased
with it all, but when he got used to it he began to think that even here he had not
enough land. The first year, he sowed wheat on his share of the Communal land,
and had a good crop. He wanted to go on sowing wheat, but had not enough
Communal land for the purpose, and what he had already used was not
available; for in those parts wheat is only sown on virgin soil or on fallow land. It
is sown for one or two years, and then the land lies fallow till it is again
overgrown with prairie grass. There were many who wanted such land, and
there was not enough for all; so that people quarrelled about it. Those who were
better off, wanted it for growing wheat, and those who were poor, wanted it to
let to dealers, so that they might raise money to pay their taxes. Pahóm wanted to
sow more wheat; so he rented land from a dealer for a year. He sowed much
wheat and had a fine crop, but the land was too far from the village -- the wheat
had to be carted more than ten miles. After a time Pahóm noticed that some
peasant-dealers were living on separate farms, and were growing wealthy; and
he thought:
'If I were to buy some freehold land, and have a homestead on it, it would
be a different thing altogether. Then it would all be nice and compact.'
The question of buying freehold land recurred to him again and again.
He went on in the same way for three years: renting land and sowing
wheat. The seasons turned out well and the crops were good, so that he began to
lay money by. He might have gone on living contentedly, but he grew tired of
having to rent other people's land every year, and having to scramble for it.
Wherever there was good land to be had, the peasants would rush for it and it
was taken up at once, so that unless you were sharp about it you got none. It
happened in the third year that he and a dealer together rented a piece of pasture
land from some peasants; and they had already ploughed it up, when there was
some dispute, and the peasants went to law about it, and things fell out so that
the labour was all lost.
'If it were my own land,' thought Pahóm, 'I should be independent, and
there would not be all this unpleasantness.'
So Pahóm began looking out for land which he could buy; and he came
across a peasant who had bought thirteen hundred acres, but having got into
difficulties was willing to sell again cheap. Pahóm bargained and haggled with
him, and at last they settled the price at 1,500 roubles, part in cash and part to be
paid later. They had all but clinched the matter, when a passing dealer happened
to stop at Pahóm's one day to get a feed for his horses. He drank tea with Pahóm,
and they had a talk. The dealer said that he was just returning from the land of
the Bashkírs, far away, where he had bought thirteen thousand acres of land, all
for 1,000 roubles. Pahóm questioned him further, and the tradesman said:
'All one need do is to make friends with the chiefs. I gave away about one
hundred roubles, worth of dressing-gowns and carpets, besides a case of tea, and

127

I gave wine to those who would drink it; and I got the land for less than
twopence an acre21. And he showed Pahóm the title-deeds, saying:
'The land lies near a river, and the whole prairie is virgin soil.'
Pahóm plied him with questions, and the tradesman said:
'There is more land there than you could cover if you walked a year, and it
all belongs to the Bashkírs. They are as simple as sheep, and land can be got
almost for nothing.'
'There now,' thought Pahóm, 'with my one thousand roubles, why should
I get only thirteen hundred acres, and saddle myself with a debt besides. If I take
it out there, I can get more than ten times as much for the money.'
V
Pahóm inquired how to get to the place, and as soon as the tradesman had
left him, he prepared to go there himself. He left his wife to look after the
homestead, and started on his journey taking his man with him. They stopped at
a town on their way, and bought a case of tea, some wine, and other presents, as
the tradesman had advised. On and on they went until they had gone more than
three hundred miles, and on the seventh day they came to a place where the
Bashkírs had pitched their tents. It was all just as the tradesman had said. The
people lived on the steppes, by a river, in felt-covered tents22. They neither tilled
the ground, nor ate bread. Their cattle and horses grazed in herds on the steppe.
The colts were tethered behind the tents, and the mares were driven to them
twice a day. The mares were milked, and from the milk kumiss was made. It was
the women who prepared kumiss, and they also made cheese. As far as the men
were concerned, drinking kumiss and tea, eating mutton, and playing on their
pipes, was all they cared about. They were all stout and merry, and all the
summer long they never thought of doing any work. They were quite ignorant,
and knew no Russian, but were good-natured enough.
As soon as they saw Pahóm, they came out of their tents and gathered
round their visitor. An interpreter was found, and Pahóm told them he had come
about some land. The Bashkírs seemed very glad they took Pahóm and led him
into one of the best tents, where they made him sit on some down cushions
placed on a carpet, while they sat round him. They gave him tea and kumiss, and
had a sheep killed, and gave him mutton to eat. Pahóm took presents out of his
cart and distributed them among the Bashkírs, and divided amongst them the
tea. The Bashkírs were delighted. They talked a great deal among themselves,
and then told the interpreter to translate.
'They wish to tell you,' said the interpreter, 'that they like you, and that it
is our custom to do all we can to please a guest and to repay him for his gifts.
You have given us presents, now tell us which of the things we possess please
you best, that we may present them to you.'
'What pleases me best here,' answered Pahóm 'is your land. Our land is
crowded, and the soil is exhausted; but you have plenty of land and it is good
land. I never saw the like of it.'
21Five kopeks for a desyatina.
22Kibitkas, as described in footnote 18.

128

The interpreter translated. The Bashkírs talked among themselves for a
while. Pahóm could not understand what they were saying, but saw that they
were much amused, and that they shouted and laughed. Then they were silent
and looked at Pahóm while the interpreter said:
'They wish me to tell you that in return for your presents they will gladly
give you as much land as you want. You have only to point it out with your hand
and it is yours.'
The Bashkírs talked again for a while and began to dispute. Pahóm asked
what they were disputing about, and the interpreter told him that some of them
thought they ought to ask their Chief about the land and not act in his absence,
while others thought there was no need to wait for his return.
VI
While the Bashkírs were disputing, a man in a large fox-fur cap appeared
on the scene. They all became silent and rose to their feet. The interpreter said,
'This is our Chief himself.'
Pahóm immediately fetched the best dressing-gown and five pounds of
tea, and offered these to the Chief. The Chief accepted them, and seated himself
in the place of honour. The Bashkírs at once began telling him something. The
Chief listened for a while, then made a sign with his head for them to be silent,
and addressing himself to Pahóm, said in Russian:
'Well, let it be so. Choose whatever piece of land you like; we have plenty
of it.'
'How can I take as much as I like?' thought Pahóm. 'I must get a deed to
make it secure, or else they may say, "It is yours," and afterwards may take it
away again.'
'Thank you for your kind words,' he said aloud. 'You have much land, and
I only want a little. But I should like to be sure which bit is mine. Could it not be
measured and made over to me? Life and death are in God's hands. You good
people give it to me, but your children might wish to take it away again.'
'You are quite right,' said the Chief. 'We will make it over to you.'
'I heard that a dealer had been here,' continued Pahóm, 'and that you gave
him a little land, too, and signed title-deeds to that effect. I should like to have it
done in the same way.'
The Chief understood.
'Yes,' replied he, 'that can be done quite easily. We have a scribe, and we
will go to town with you and have the deed properly sealed.'
'And what will be the price?' asked Pahóm.
'Our price is always the same: one thousand roubles a day.'
Pahóm did not understand.
'A day? What measure is that? How many acres would that be?'
'We do not know how to reckon it out,' said the Chief. 'We sell it by the
day. As much as you can go round on your feet in a day is yours, and the price is
one thousand roubles a day.'
Pahóm was surprised.
'But in a day you can get round a large tract of land,' he said.
129

The Chief laughed.
'It will all be yours!' said he. 'But there is one condition: If you don't return
on the same day to the spot whence you started, your money is lost.'
'But how am I to mark the way that I have gone?'
'Why, we shall go to any spot you like, and stay there. You must start from
that spot and make your round, taking a spade with you. Wherever you think
necessary, make a mark. At every turning, dig a hole and pile up the turf; then
afterwards we will go round with a plough from hole to hole. You may make as
large a circuit as you please, but before the sun sets you must return to the place
you started from. All the land you cover will be yours.'
Pahóm was delighted. It was decided to start early next morning. They
talked a while, and after drinking some more kumiss and eating some more
mutton, they had tea again, and then the night came on. They gave Pahóm a
feather-bed to sleep on, and the Bashkírs dispersed for the night, promising to
assemble the next morning at daybreak and ride out before sunrise to the
appointed spot.
VII
Pahóm lay on the feather-bed, but could not sleep. He kept thinking about
the land.
'What a large tract I will mark off!' thought he. 'I can easily do thirty-five
miles in a day. The days are long now, and within a circuit of thirty-five miles
what a lot of land there will be! I will sell the poorer land, or let it to peasants, but
I'll pick out the best and farm it. I will buy two ox-teams, and hire two more
labourers. About a hundred and fifty acres shall be plough-land, and I will
pasture cattle on the rest.'
Pahóm lay awake all night, and dozed off only just before dawn. Hardly
were his eyes closed when he had a dream. He thought he was lying in that same
tent, and heard somebody chuckling outside. He wondered who it could be, and
rose and went out and he saw the Bashkír Chief sitting in front of the tent
holding his sides and rolling about with laughter. Going nearer to the Chief,
Pahóm asked: 'What are you laughing at?' But he saw that it was no longer the
Chief, but the dealer who had recently stopped at his house and had told him
about the land. Just as Pahóm was going to ask, 'Have you been here long?' he
saw that it was not the dealer, but the peasant who had come up from the Volga,
long ago, to Pahóm's old home. Then he saw that it was not the peasant either,
but the Devil himself with hoofs and horns sitting there and chuckling, and
before him lay a man barefoot, prostrate on the ground, with only trousers and a
shirt on. And Pahóm dreamt that he looked more attentively to see what sort of a
man it was that was lying there, and he saw that the man was dead and that it
was himself! He awoke horror-struck.
'What things one does dream,' thought he.
Looking round he saw through the open door that the dawn was
breaking.
'It's time to wake them up,' thought he. 'We ought to be starting.'
130

He got up, roused his man (who was sleeping in his cart), bade him
harness; and went to call the Bashkírs.
'It's time to go to the steppe to measure the land,' he said.
The Bashkírs rose and assembled, and the Chief came too. Then they
began drinking kumiss again, and offered Pahóm some tea, but he would not
wait.
'If we are to go, let us go. It is high time,' said he.
VIII
The Bashkírs got ready and they all started: some mounted on horses, and
some in carts. Pahóm drove in his own small cart with his servant, and took a
spade with him. When they reached the steppe, the morning red was beginning
to kindle. They ascended a hillock (called by the Bashkírs a shikhan) and
dismounting from their carts and their horses, gathered in one spot. The Chief
came up to Pahóm and stretching out his arm towards the plain:
'See,' said he, 'all this, as far as your eye can reach, is ours. You may have
any part of it you like.'
Pahóm's eyes glistened: it was all virgin soil, as flat as the palm of your
hand, as black as the seed of a poppy, and in the hollows different kinds of
grasses grew breast high.
The Chief took off his fox-fur cap, placed it on the ground and said:
'This will be the mark. Start from here, and return here again. All the land
you go round shall be yours.'
Pahóm took out his money and put it on the cap. Then he took off his
outer coat, remaining in his sleeveless under-coat. He unfastened his girdle and
tied it tight below his stomach, put a little bag of bread into the breast of his coat,
and tying a flask of water to his girdle, he drew up the tops of his boots, took the
spade from his man, and stood ready to start. He considered for some moments
which way he had better go -- it was tempting everywhere.
'No matter,' he concluded, 'I will go towards the rising sun.'
He turned his face to the east, stretched himself and waited for the sun to
appear above the rim.
'I must lose no time,' he thought, 'and it is easier walking while it is still
cool.'
The sun's rays had hardly flashed above the horizon, before Pahóm,
carrying the spade over his shoulder went down into the steppe.
Pahóm started walking neither slowly nor quickly. After having gone a
thousand yards he stopped, dug a hole, and placed pieces of turf one on another
to make it more visible. Then he went on; and now that he had walked off his
stiffness he quickened his pace. After a while he dug another hole.
Pahóm looked back. The hillock could be distinctly seen in the sunlight,
with the people on it, and the glittering tyres of the cart-wheels. At a rough guess
Pahóm concluded that he had walked three miles. It was growing warmer; he
took off his under-coat, flung it across his shoulder, and went on again. It had
grown quite warm now; he looked at the sun, it was time to think of breakfast.
131

'The first shift is done, but there are four in a day, and it is too soon yet to
turn. But I will just take off my boots,' said he to himself.
He sat down, took off his boots, stuck them into his girdle, and went on. It
was easy walking now.
'I will go on for another three miles,' thought he, 'and then turn to the left.
This spot is so fine, that it would be a pity to lose it. The further one goes, the
better the land seems.'
He went straight on for a while, and when he looked round, the hillock
was scarcely visible and the people on it looked like black ants, and he could just
see something glistening there in the sun.
'Ah,' thought Pahóm, 'I have gone far enough in this direction, it is time to
turn. Besides I am in a regular sweat, and very thirsty.'
He stopped, dug a large hole, and heaped up pieces of turf. Next he untied
his flask, had a drink, and then turned sharply to the left. He went on and on; the
grass was high, and it was very hot.
Pahóm began to grow tired: he looked at the sun and saw that it was
noon.
'Well,' he thought, 'I must have a rest.'
He sat down, and ate some bread and drank some water; but he did not lie
down, thinking that if he did he might fall asleep. After sitting a little while, he
went on again. At first he walked easily: the food had strengthened him; but it
had become terribly hot, and he felt sleepy; still he went on, thinking: 'An hour to
suffer, a life-time to live.'
He went a long way in this direction also, and was about to turn to the left
again, when he perceived a damp hollow: 'It would be a pity to leave that out,' he
thought. 'Flax would do well there.' So he went on past the hollow, and dug a
hole on the other side of it before he turned the corner. Pahóm looked towards
the hillock. The heat made the air hazy: it seemed to be quivering, and through
the haze the people on the hillock could scarcely be seen.
'Ah!' thought Pahóm, 'I have made the sides too long; I must make this
one shorter.' And he went along the third side stepping faster. He looked at the
sun: it was nearly half way to the horizon, and he had not yet done two miles of
the third side of the square. He was still ten miles from the goal.
'No,' he thought, 'though it will make my land lop-sided, I must hurry
back in a straight line now. I might go too far, and as it is I have a great deal of
land.'
So Pahóm hurriedly dug a hole, and turned straight towards the hillock.
IX
Pahóm went straight towards the hillock, but he now walked with
difficulty. He was done up with the heat, his bare feet were cut and bruised, and
his legs began to fail. He longed to rest, but it was impossible if he meant to get
back before sunset. The sun waits for no man, and it was sinking lower and
lower.
'Oh dear,' he thought, 'if only I have not blundered trying for too much!
What if I am too late?'
132

He looked towards the hillock and at the sun. He was still far from his
goal, and the sun was already near the rim
Pahóm walked on and on; it was very hard walking, but he went quicker
and quicker. He pressed on, but was still far from the place. He began running,
threw away his coat, his boots, his flask, and his cap, and kept only the spade
which he used as a support.
'What shall I do,' he thought again, 'I have grasped too much, and ruined
the whole affair. I can't get there before the sun sets.'
And this fear made him still more breathless. Pahóm went on running, his
soaking shirt and trousers stuck to him, and his mouth was parched. His breast
was working like a blacksmith's bellows, his heart was beating like a hammer,
and his legs were giving way as if they did not belong to him. Pahóm was seized
with terror lest he should die of the strain.
Though afraid of death, he could not stop. 'After having run all that way
they will call me a fool if I stop now,' thought he. And he ran on and on, and
drew near and heard the Bashkírs yelling and shouting to him, and their cries
inflamed his heart still more. He gathered his last strength and ran on.
The sun was close to the rim, and cloaked in mist looked large, and red as
blood. Now, yes now, it was about to set! The sun was quite low, but he was also
quite near his aim. Pahóm could already see the people on the hillock waving
their arms to hurry him up. He could see the fox-fur cap on the ground, and the
money on it, and the Chief sitting on the ground holding his sides. And Pahóm
remembered his dream.
'There is plenty of land,' thought he, 'but will God let me live on it? I have
lost my life, I have lost my life! I shall never reach that spot!'
Pahóm looked at the sun, which had reached the earth: one side of it had
already disappeared. With all his remaining strength he rushed on, bending his
body forward so that his legs could hardly follow fast enough to keep him from
falling. Just as he reached the hillock it suddenly grew dark. He looked up -- the
sun had already set! He gave a cry: 'All my labour has been in vain,' thought he,
and was about to stop, but he heard the Bashkírs still shouting, and remembered
that though to him, from below, the sun seemed to have set, they on the hillock
could still see it. He took a long breath and ran up the hillock. It was still light
there. He reached the top and saw the cap. Before it sat the Chief laughing and
holding his sides. Again Pahóm remembered his dream, and he uttered a cry: his
legs gave way beneath him, he fell forward and reached the cap with his hands.
'Ah, that's a fine fellow!' exclaimed the Chief 'He has gained much land!'
Pahóm's servant came running up and tried to raise him, but he saw that
blood was flogging from his mouth. Pahóm was dead!
The Bashkírs clicked their tongues to show their pity.
His servant picked up the spade and dug a grave long enough for Pahóm
to he in, and buried him in it. Six feet from his head to his heels was all he
needed.
1886.

133

15

A GRAIN AS BIG AS A HEN'S EGG
ONE day some children found, in a ravine, a thing shaped like a grain of corn,
with a groove down the middle, but as large as a hen's egg. A traveller passing
by saw the thing, bought it from the children for a penny, and taking it to town
sold it to the King as a curiosity.
The King called together his wise men, and told them to find out what the
thing was. The wise men pondered and pondered and could not make head or
tail of it, till one day, when the thing was lying on a window-sill, a hen flew in
and pecked at it till she made a hole in it, and then every one saw that it was a
grain of corn. The wise men went to the King and said:
'It is a grain of corn.'
At this the King was much surprised; and he ordered the learned men to
find out when and where such corn had grown. The learned men pondered
again, and searched in their books, but could find nothing about it. So they
returned to the King and said:
'We can give you no answer. There is nothing about it in our books. You
will have to ask the peasants; perhaps some of them may have heard from their
fathers when and where grain grew to such a size.'
So the King gave orders that some very old peasant should be brought
before him; and his servants found such a man and brought him to the King. Old
and bent, ashy pale and toothless, he just managed with the help of two crutches
to totter into the King's presence.
The King showed him the grain, but the old man could hardly see it; he
took it, however, and felt it with his hands. The King questioned him, saying:
'Can you tell us, old man, where such grain as this grew? Have you ever
bought such corn, or sown such in your fields?'
The old man was so deaf that he could hardly hear what the King said,
and only understood with great difficulty.
'No!' he answered at last, 'I never sowed nor reaped any like it in my
fields, nor did I ever buy any such. When we bought corn, the grains were
always as small as they are now. But you might ask my father. He may have
heard where such grain grew.'
So the King sent for the old man's father, and he was found and brought
before the King. He came walking with one crutch. The King showed him the
grain, and the old peasant, who was still able to see, took a good look at it. And
the King asked him:
'Can you not tell us, old man, where corn like this used to grow? Have
you ever bought any like it, or sown any in your fields?'
Though the old man was rather hard of hearing, he still heard better than
his son had done.
'No,' he said, 'I never sowed nor reaped any grain like this in my field. As
to buying, I never bought any, for in my time money was not yet in use. Every
one grew his own corn, and when there was any need we shared with one
134

another. I do not know where corn like this grew. Ours was larger and yielded
more flour than present-day grain, but I never saw any like this. I have, however,
heard my father say that in his time the grain grew larger and yielded more flour
than ours. You had better ask him.'
So the King sent for this old man's father, and they found him too, and
brought him before the King. He entered walking easily and without crutches:
his eye was clear, his hearing good, and he spoke distinctly. The King showed
him the grain, and the old grandfather looked at it, and turned it about in his
hand.
'It is long since I saw such a fine grain,' said he, and he bit a piece off and
tasted it.
'It's the very same kind,' he added.
'Tell me, grandfather,' said the King, 'when and where was such corn
grown? Have you ever bought any like it, or sown any in your fields?'
And the old man replied:
'Corn like this used to grow everywhere in my time. I lived on corn like
this in my young days, and fed others on it. It was grain like this that we used to
sow and reap and thrash.'
And the King asked:
'Tell me, grandfather, did you buy it anywhere, or did you grow it all
yourself?'
The old man smiled.
'In my time,' he answered, 'no one ever thought of such a sin as buying or
selling bread; and we knew nothing of money. Each man had corn enough of his
own.'
'Then tell me, grandfather,' asked the King, 'where was your field, where
did you grow corn like this?'
And the grandfather answered:
'My field was God's earth. Wherever I ploughed, there was my field. Land
was free. It was a thing no man called his own. Labour was the only thing men
called their own.'
'Answer me two more questions,' said the King. 'The first is, Why did the
earth bear such grain then and has ceased to do so now? And the second is, Why
your grandson walks with two crutches, your son with one, and you yourself
with none? Your eyes are bright, your teeth sound, and your speech clear and
pleasant to the ear. How have these things come about?'
And the old man answered:
'These things are so, because men have ceased to live by their own labour,
and have taken to depending on the labour of others. In the old time, men lived
according to God's law. They had what was their own, and coveted not what
others had produced.
1886.

135

16

THE GODSON
'Ye have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth,
but I say unto you, Resist not him that is evil.' -- Matt. v. 38, 39.
'Vengeance is mine; I will repay.' -- Rom. xii. 19.
I
A SON was born to a poor peasant. He was glad and went to his neighbour to
ask him to stand godfather to the boy. The neighbour refused -- he did not like
standing godfather to a poor man's child. The peasant asked another neighbour,
but he too refused, and after that the poor father went to every house in the
village, but found no one willing to be godfather to his son. So he set off to
another village, and on the way he met a man who stopped and said:
'Good-day, my good man; where are you off to?'
'God has given me a child,' said the peasant, 'to rejoice my eyes in youth,
to comfort my old age, and to pray for my soul after death. But I am poor, and no
one in our village will stand godfather to him, so I am now on my way to seek a
godfather for him elsewhere.'
'Let me be godfather,' said the stranger.
The peasant was glad, and thanked him, but added: 'And whom shall I
ask to be godmother?'
'Go to the town,' replied the stranger, 'and, in the square, you will see a
stone house with shop-windows in the front. At the entrance you will find the
tradesman to whom it belongs. Ask him to let his daughter stand godmother to
your child.'
The peasant hesitated.
'How can I ask a rich tradesman?' said he. 'He will despise me, and will
not let his daughter come.'
'Don't trouble about that. Go and ask. Get everything ready by to-morrow
morning, and I will come to the christening.'
The poor peasant returned home, and then drove to the town to find the
tradesman. He had hardly taken his horse into the yard, when the tradesman
himself came out.
'What do you want?' said he.
'Why, sir,' said the peasant, 'you see God has given me a son to rejoice my
eyes in youth, to comfort my old age, and to pray for my soul after death. Be so
kind as to let your daughter stand godmother to him.
'And when is the christening?' said the tradesman.
'To-morrow morning.'
'Very well. Go in peace. She shall be with you at Mass to-morrow
morning.'

136

The next day the godmother came, and the godfather also, and the infant
was baptized. Immediately after the christening the godfather went away. They
did not know who he was, and never saw him again.
II
The child grew up to be a joy to his parents. He was strong, willing to
work, clever and obedient. When he was ten years old his parents sent him to
school to learn to read and write. What others learnt in five years, he learnt in
one, and soon there was nothing more they could teach him.
Easter came round, and the boy went to see his godmother, to give her his
Easter greeting.
'Father and mother,' said he when he got home again, 'where does my
godfather live? I should like to give him my Easter greeting, too.'
And his father answered:
'We know nothing about your godfather, dear son. We often regret it
ourselves. Since the day you were christened we have never seen him, nor had
any news of him. We do not know where he lives, or even whether he is still
alive.'
The son bowed to his parents.
'Father and mother,' said he, 'let me go and look for my godfather. I must
find him and give him my Easter greeting.
So his father and mother let him go, and the boy set off to find his
godfather.
III
The boy left the house and set out along the road. He had been walking
for several hours when he met a stranger who stopped him and said:
'Good-day to you, my boy. Where are you going?'
And the boy answered:
'I went to see my godmother and to give her my Easter greeting, and
when I got home I asked my parents where my godfather lives, that I might go
and greet him also. They told me they did not know. They said he went away as
soon as I was christened, and they know nothing about him, not even if he be still
alive. But I wished to see my godfather, and so I have set out to look for him.'
Then the stranger said: 'I am your godfather.'
The boy was glad to hear this. After kissing his godfather three times for
an Easter greeting, he asked him:
'Which way are you going now, godfather? If you are coming our way,
please come to our house; but if you are going home, I will go with you.'
'I have no time now,' replied his godfather, 'to come to your house. I have
business in several villages; but I shall return home again to-morrow. Come and
see me then.'
'But how shall I find you, godfather?'
'When you leave home, go straight towards the rising sun, and you will
come to a forest; going through the forest you will come to a glade. When you
137

reach this glade sit down and rest awhile, and look around you and see what
happens. On the further side of the forest you will find a garden, and in it a
house with a golden roof. That is my home. Go up to the gate, and I will myself
be there to meet you.'
And having said this the godfather disappeared from his godson's sight.
IV
The boy did as his godfather had told him. He walked eastward until he
reached a forest, and there he came to a glade, and in the midst of the glade he
saw a pine tree to a branch of which was tied a rope supporting a heavy log of
oak. Close under this log stood a wooden trough filled with honey. Hardly had
the boy had time to wonder why the honey was placed there, and why the log
hung above it, when he heard a crackling in the wood, and saw some bears
approaching; a she-bear, followed by a yearling and three tiny cubs. The shebear, sniffing the air, went straight to the trough, the cubs following her. She
thrust her muzzle into the honey, and called the cubs to do the same. They
scampered up and began to eat. As they did so, the log, which the she-bear had
moved aside with her head, swung away a little and, returning, gave the cubs a
push. Seeing this the she-bear shoved the log away with her paw. It swung
further out and returned more forcibly, striking one cub on the back and another
on the head. The cubs ran away howling with pain, and the mother, with a
growl, caught the log in her fore paws and, raising it above her head flung it
away. The log flew high in the air and the yearling, rushing to the trough,
pushed his muzzle into the honey and began to suck noisily. The others also
drew near, but they had not reached the trough when the log, flying back, struck
the yearling on the head and killed him. The mother growled louder than before
and, seizing the log, flung it from her with all her might. It flew higher than the
branch it was tied to; so high that the rope slackened; and the she-bear returned
to the trough, and the little cubs after her. The log flew higher and higher, then
stopped, and began to fall. The nearer it came the faster it swung, and at last, at
full speed, it crashed down on her head. The she-bear rolled over, her legs jerked
and she died! The cubs ran away into the forest.
V
The boy watched all this in surprise, and then continued his way. Leaving
the forest, he came upon a large garden in the midst of which stood a lofty palace
with a golden roof. At the gate stood his godfather, smiling. He welcomed his
godson, and led him through the gateway into the garden. The boy had never
dreamed of such beauty and delight as surrounded him in that place.
Then his godfather led him into the palace, which was even more
beautiful inside than outside. The godfather showed the boy through all the
rooms: each brighter and finer than the other, but at last they came to one door
that was sealed up.
'You see this door,' said he. 'It is not locked, but only sealed. It can be
opened, but I forbid you to open it. You may live here, and go where you please
138

and enjoy all the delights of the place. My only command is -- do not open that
door! But should you ever do so, remember what you saw in the forest.'
Having said this the godfather went away. The godson remained in the
palace, and life there was so bright and joyful that he thought he had only been
there three hours, when he had really lived there thirty years. When thirty years
had gone by, the godson happened to be passing the sealed door one day, and he
wondered why his godfather had forbidden him to enter that room.
'I'll just look in and see what is there,' thought he, and he gave the door a
push. The seals gave way, the door opened, and the godson entering saw a hall
more lofty and beautiful than all the others, and in the midst of it a throne. He
wandered about the hall for a while, and then mounted the steps and seated
himself upon the throne. As he sat there he noticed a sceptre leaning against the
throne, and took it in his hand. Hardly had he done so when the four walls of the
hall suddenly disappeared. The godson looked around, and saw the whole
world, and all that men were doing in it. He looked in front, and saw the sea
with ships sailing on it. He looked to the right, and saw where strange heathen
people lived. He looked to the left, and saw where men who were Christians, but
not Russians, lived. He looked round, and on the fourth side, he saw Russian
people, like himself.
'I will look,' said he, 'and see what is happening at home, and whether the
harvest is good.'
He looked towards his father's fields and saw the sheaves standing in
stooks. He began counting them to see whether there was much corn, when he
noticed a peasant driving in a cart. It was night, and the godson thought it was
his father coming to cart the corn by night. But as he looked he recognized Vasíly
Koudryashóf, the thief, driving into the field and beginning to load the sheaves
on to his cart. This made the godson angry, and he called out:
'Father, the sheaves are being stolen from our field!'
His father, who was out with the horses in the night-pasture, woke up.
'I dreamt the sheaves were being stolen,' said he. 'I will just ride down and
see.'
So he got on a horse and rode out to the field. Finding Vasíly there, he
called together other peasants to help him, and Vasíly was beaten, bound, and
taken to prison.
Then the godson looked at the town, where his godmother lived. He saw
that she was now married to a tradesman. She lay asleep, and her husband rose
and went to his mistress. The godson shouted to her:
'Get up, get up, your husband has taken to evil ways.'
The godmother jumped up and dressed, and finding out where her
husband was, she shamed and beat his mistress, and drove him away.
Then the godson looked for his mother, and saw her lying asleep in her
cottage. And a thief crept into the cottage and began to break open the chest in
which she kept her things. The mother awoke and screamed, and the robber
seizing an axe, swung it over his head to kill her.
The godson could not refrain from hurling the sceptre at the robber. It
struck him upon the temple, and killed him on the spot.
139

VI
As soon as the godson had killed the robber, the walls closed and the hall
became just as it had been before.
Then the door opened and the godfather entered, and coming up to his
godson he took him by the hand and led him down from the throne.
'You have not obeyed my command,' said he. 'You did one wrong thing,
when you opened the forbidden door; another, when you mounted the throne
and took my sceptre into your hands; and you have now done a third wrong,
which has much increased the evil in the world. Had you sat here an hour longer,
you would have ruined half mankind.'
Then the godfather led his godson back to the throne, and took the sceptre
in his hand; and again the walls fell asunder and all things became visible. And
the godfather said:
'See what you have done to your father. Vasíly has now been a year in
prison, and has come out having learnt every kind of wickedness, and has
become quite incorrigible. See, he has stolen two of your father's horses, and he is
now setting fire to his barn. All this you have brought upon your father.'
The godson saw his father's barn breaking into flames, but his godfather
shut off the sight from him, and told him to look another way.
'Here is your godmother's husband,' he said. 'It is a year since he left his
wife, and now he goes after other women. His former mistress has sunk to still
lower depths. Sorrow has driven his wife to drink. That's what you have done to
your godmother.'
The godfather shut off this also, and showed the godson his father's house.
There he saw his mother weeping for her sins, repenting, and saying:
'It would have been better had the robber killed me that night. I should
not have sinned so heavily.'
'That,' said the godfather, 'is what you have done to your mother.'
He shut this off also, and pointed downwards; and the godson saw two
warders holding the robber in front of a prison-house.
And the godfather said:
'This man had murdered ten men. He should have expiated his sins
himself, but by killing him you have taken his sins on yourself. Now you must
answer for all his sins. That is what you have done to yourself. The she-bear
pushed the log aside once, and disturbed her cubs; she pushed it again, and
killed her yearling; she pushed it a third time, and was killed herself. You have
done the same. Now I give you thirty years to go into the world and atone for the
robber's sins. If you do not atone for them, you will have to take his place.'
'How am I to atone for his sins?' asked the godson.
And the godfather answered:
'When you have rid the world of as much evil as you have brought into it,
you will have atoned both for your own sins and for those of the robber.'
'How can I destroy evil in the world?' the godson asked.
'Go out,' replied the godfather, 'and walk straight towards the rising sun.
After a time you will come to a field with some men in it. Notice what they are
doing, and teach them what you know. Then go on and note what you see. On
140

the fourth day you will come to a forest. In the midst of the forest is a cell and in
the cell lives a hermit. Tell him all that has happened. He will teach you what to
do. When you have done all he tells you, you will have atoned for your own and
the robber's sins.'
And, having said this, the godfather led his godson out of the gate.
VII
The godson went his way, and as he went he thought: How am I to
destroy evil in the world? Evil is destroyed by banishing evil men, keeping them
in prison, or putting them to death. How then am I to destroy evil without taking
the sins of others upon myself?'
The godson pondered over it for a long time, but could come to no
conclusion. He went on until he came to a field where corn was growing thick
and good and ready for the reapers. The godson saw that a little calf had got in
among the corn. Some men who were at hand saw it, and mounting their horses
they chased it backwards and forwards through the corn. Each time the calf was
about to come out of the corn some one rode up and the calf got frightened and
turned back again, and they all galloped after it, trampling down the corn. On
the road stood a woman crying.
'They will chase my calf to death,' she said.
And the godson said to the peasants:
'What are you doing? Come out of the cornfield all of you, and let the
woman call her calf.'
The men did so; and the woman came to the edge of the cornfield and
called to the calf. 'Come along browney, come along,' said she. The calf pricked
up its ears, listened a while, and then ran towards the woman of its own accord,
and hid its head in her skirts, almost knocking her over. The men were glad the
woman was glad, and so was the little calf.
The godson went on, and he thought:
'Now I see that evil spreads evil. The more people try to drive away evil,
the more the evil grows. Evil, it seems, cannot be destroyed by evil; but in what
way it can be destroyed, I do not know. The calf obeyed its mistress and so all
went well; but if it had not obeyed her, how could we have got it out of the field?'
The godson pondered again, but came to no conclusion, and continued his
way.
VIII
He went on until he came to a village. At the furthest end he stopped and
asked leave to stay the night. The woman of the house was there alone, housecleaning, and she let him in. The godson entered, and taking his seat upon the
brick oven he watched what the woman was doing. He saw her finish scrubbing
the room and begin scrubbing the table. Having done this, she began wiping the
table with a dirty cloth. She wiped it from side to side -- but it did not come
clean. The soiled cloth left streaks of dirt. Then she wiped it the other way. The
first streaks disappeared, but others came in their place. Then she wiped it from
141

one end to the other, but again the same thing happened. The soiled cloth messed
the table; when one streak was wiped off another was left on. The godson
watched for awhile in silence, and then said:
'What are you doing, mistress?'
'Don't you see I'm cleaning up for the holiday. Only I can't manage this
table, it won't come clean. I'm quite tired out.'
'You should rinse your cloth,' said the godson, 'before you wipe the table
with it.'
The woman did so, and soon had the table clean.
'Thank you for telling me,' said she.
In the morning he took leave of the woman and went on his way. After
walking a good while, he came to the edge of a forest. There he saw some
peasants who were making wheel-rims of bent wood. Coming nearer, the godson
saw that the men were going round and round, but could not bend the wood.
He stood and looked on, and noticed that the block, to which the piece of
wood was fastened, was not fixed, but as the men moved round it went round
too. Then the godson said:
'What are you doing, friends?'
'Why, don't you see, we are making wheel rims. We have twice steamed
the wood, and are quite tired out, but the wood will not bend.'
'You should fix the block, friends,' said the godson, 'or else it goes round
when you do.'
The peasants took his advice and fixed the block, and then the work went
on merrily.
The godson spent the night with them, and then went on. He walked all
day and all night, and just before dawn he came upon some drovers encamped
for the night, and lay down beside them. He saw that they had got all their cattle
settled, and were trying to light a fire. They had taken dry twigs and lighted
them, but before the twigs had time to burn up, they smothered them with damp
brushwood. The brushwood hissed and the fire smouldered and went out. Then
the drovers brought more dry wood, lit it, and again put on the brushwood -and again the fire went out. They struggled with it for a long time, but could not
get the fire to burn. Then the godson said:
'Do not be in such a hurry to put on the brushwood. Let the dry wood
burn up properly before you put any on. When the fire is well alight you can put
on as much as you please.'
The drovers followed his advice. They let the fire burn up fiercely before
adding the brushwood, which then flared up so that they soon had a roaring fire.
The godson remained with them for a while, and then continued his way.
He went on, wondering what the three things he had seen might mean; but he
could not fathom them.
IX
The godson walked the whole of that day, and in the evening came to
another forest. There he found a hermit's cell, at which he knocked.
'Who is there?' asked a voice from within.
142

'A great sinner,' replied the godson. I must atone for another's sins as well
as for my own.
The hermit hearing this came out.
'What sins are those that you have to bear for another?'
The godson told him everything: about his godfather; about the she-bear
with the cubs; about the throne in the sealed room; about the commands his
godfather had given him, as well as about the peasants he had seen trampling
down the corn, and the calf that ran out when its mistress called it.
'I have seen that one cannot destroy evil by evil,' said he, 'but I cannot
understand how it is to be destroyed. Teach me how it can be done.
'Tell me,' replied the hermit, 'what else you have seen on your way.'
The godson told him about the woman washing the table, and the men
making cart-wheels, and the drovers fighting their fire.
The hermit listened to it all, and then went back to his cell and brought out
an old jagged axe.
'Come with me,' said he.
When they had gone some way, the hermit pointed to a tree.
'Cut it down,' he said.
The godson felled the tree.
'Now chop it into three,' said the hermit.
The godson chopped the tree into three pieces. Then the hermit went back
to his cell, and brought out some blazing sticks.
'Burn those three logs,' said he.
So the godson made a fire, and burnt the three logs till only three charred
stumps remained.
'Now plant them half in the ground, like this.'
The godson did so.
'You see that river at the foot of the hill. Bring water from there in your
mouth, and water these stumps. Water this stump, as you taught the woman: this
one as you taught the wheel-wrights: and this one, as you taught the drovers.
When all three have taken root and from these charred stumps apple-trees have
sprung you will know how to destroy evil in men, and will have atoned for all
your sins.'
Having said this, the hermit returned to his cell. The godson pondered for
a long time, but could not understand what the hermit meant. Nevertheless he
set to work to do as he had been told.
The godson went down to the river, filled his mouth with water, and
returning, emptied it on to one of the charred stumps. This he did again and
again, and watered all three-stumps. When he was hungry and quite tired out, he
went to the cell to ask the old hermit for some food. He opened the door, and
there upon a bench he saw the old man lying dead. The godson looked round for
food, and he found some dried bread and ate a little of it. Then he took a spade
and set to work to dig the hermit's grave. During the night he carried water and
watered the stumps, and in the day he dug the grave. He had hardly finished the
grave and was about to bury the corpse, when some people from the village
came, bringing food for the old man.
143

The people heard that the old hermit was dead, and that he had given the
godson his blessing, and left him in his place. So they buried the old man, gave
the bread they had brought to the godson, and promising to bring him some
more, they went away.
The godson remained in the old man's place. There he lived, eating the
food people brought him, and doing as he had been told: carrying water from the
river in his mouth and watering the charred stumps.
He lived thus for a year, and many people visited him. His fame spread
abroad, as a holy man who lived in the forest and brought water from the bottom
of a hill in his mouth to water charred stumps for the salvation of his soul. People
flocked to see him. Rich merchants drove up bringing him presents, but he kept
only the barest necessaries for himself, and gave the rest away to the poor.
And so the godson lived: carrying water in his mouth and watering the
stumps half the day, and resting and receiving people the other half. And he
began to think that this was the way he had been told to live, in order to destroy
evil and atone for his sins.
He spent two years in this manner, not omitting for a single day to water
the stumps. But still not one of them sprouted.
One day, as he sat in his cell, he heard a man ride past, singing as he went.
The godson came out to see what sort of a man it was. He saw a strong young
fellow, well dressed, and mounted on a handsome, well-saddled horse.
The godson stopped him, and asked him who he was, and where he was
going.
'I am a robber,' the man answered, drawing rein. 'I ride about the
highways killing people; and the more I kill, the merrier are the songs I sing.'
The godson was horror-struck, and thought:
'How can the evil be destroyed in such a man as this? It is easy to speak to
those who come to me of their own accord and confess their sins. But this one
boasts of the evil he does.'
So he said nothing, and turned away, thinking: 'What am I to do now?
This robber may take to riding about here, and he will frighten away the people.
They will leave off coming to me. It will be a loss to them, and I shall not know
how to live.'
So the godson turned back, and said to the robber:
'People come to me here, not to boast of their sins, but to repent, and to
pray for forgiveness. Repent of your sins, if you fear God; but if there is no
repentance in your heart, then go away and never come here again. Do not
trouble me, and do not frighten people away from me. If you do not hearken,
God will punish you.'
The robber laughed:
'I am not afraid of God, and I will not listen to you. You are not my
master,' said he. 'You live by your piety, and I by my robbery. We all must live.
You may teach the old women who come to you, but you have nothing to teach
me. And because you have reminded me of God, I will kill two more men
tomorrow. I would kill you, but I do not want to soil my hands just now. See that
in future you keep out of my way!'
144

Having uttered this threat, the robber rode away. He did not come again,
and the godson lived in peace, as before, for eight more years.
XI
One night the godson watered his stumps, and, after returning to his cell,
he sat down to rest, and watched the footpath, wondering if some one would
soon come. But no one came at all that day. He sat alone till evening, feeling
lonely and dull, and he thought about his past life. Ho remembered how the
robber had reproached him for living by his piety; and he reflected on his way of
life. 'I am not living as the hermit commanded me to,' thought he. 'The hermit
laid a penance upon me, and I have made both a living and fame out of it; and
have been so tempted by it, that now I feel dull when people do not come to me;
and when they do come, I only rejoice because they praise my holiness. That is
not how one should live. I have been led astray by love of praise. I have not
atoned for my past sins, but have added fresh ones. I will go to another part of
the forest where people will not find me; and I will live so as to atone for my old
sins and commit no fresh ones.'
Having come to this conclusion the godson filled a bag with dried bread
and, taking a spade, left the cell and started for a ravine he knew of in a lonely
spot, where he could dig himself a cave and hide from the people.
As he was going along with his bag and his spade he saw the robber
riding towards him. The godson was frightened, and started to run away, but the
robber overtook him.
'Where are you going?' asked the robber.
The godson told him he wished to get away from the people and live
somewhere where no one would come to him. This surprised the robber.
'What will you live on, if people do not come to see you?' asked he.
The godson had not even thought of this, but the robber's question
reminded him that food would be necessary.
'On what God pleases to give me,' he replied.
The robber said nothing, and rode away.
'Why did I not say anything to him about his way of life?' thought the
godson. 'He might repent now. To-day he seems in a gentler mood, and has not
threatened to kill me.' And he shouted to the robber:
'You have still to repent of your sins. You cannot escape from God.'
The robber turned his horse, and drawing a knife from his girdle
threatened the hermit with it. The latter was alarmed, and ran away further into
the forest.
The robber did not follow him, but only shouted:
'Twice I have let you off, old man, but next time you come in my way I
will kill you!'
Having said this, he rode away. In the evening when the godson went to
water his stumps -- one of them was sprouting! A little apple tree was growing
out of it.
XII
145

After hiding himself from everybody, the godson lived all alone. When his
supply of bread was exhausted, he thought: 'Now I must go and look for some
roots to eat.' He had not gone far, however, before he saw a bag of dried bread
hanging on a branch. He took it down, and as long as it lasted he lived upon that.
When he had eaten it all, he found another bagful on the same branch. So
he lived on, his only trouble being his fear of the robber. Whenever he heard the
robber passing he hid thinking:
'He may kill me before I have had time to atone for my sins.'
In this way he lived for ten more years. The one apple-tree continued to
grow, but the other two stumps remained exactly as they were.
One morning the godson rose early and went to his work. By the time he
had thoroughly moistened the ground round the stumps, he was tired out and
sat down to rest. As he sat there he thought to himself:
'I have sinned, and have become afraid of death. It may be God's will that
I should redeem my sins by death.'
Hardly had this thought crossed his mind when he heard the robber
riding up, swearing at something. When the godson heard this, he thought:
'No evil and no good can befall me from any one but from God.'
And he went to meet the robber. He saw the robber was not alone, but
behind him on the saddle sat another man, gagged, and bound hand and foot.
The man was doing nothing, but the robber was abusing him violently. The
godson went up and stood in front of the horse.
'Where are you taking this man?' he asked.
'Into the forest,' replied the robber. 'He is a merchant's son, and will not
tell me where his father's money is hidden. I am going to flog him till he tells me.'
And the robber spurred on his horse, but the godson caught hold of his
bridle, and would not let him pass.
'Let this man go!' he said.
The robber grew angry, and raised his arm to strike.
'Would you like a taste of what I am going to give this man? Have I not
promised to kill you? Let go!'
The godson was not afraid.
'You shall not go,' said he. 'I do not fear you. I fear no one but God, and He
wills that I should not let you pass. Set this man free!'
The robber frowned, and snatching out his knife, cut the ropes with which
the merchant's son was bound, and set him free.
'Get away both of you,' he said, 'and beware hour you cross my path
again.'
The merchant's son jumped down and ran away. The robber was about to
ride on, but the godson stopped him again, and again spoke to him about giving
up his evil life. The robber heard him to the end in silence, and then rode away
without a word.
The next morning the godson went to water his stumps and lo! the second
stump was sprouting. A second young apple-tree had begun to grow.
XIII
146

Another ten years had gone by. The godson was sitting quietly one day,
desiring nothing, fearing nothing, and with a heart full of joy.
'What blessings God showers on men!' thought he. 'Yet how needlessly
they torment themselves. What prevents them from living happily?'
And remembering all the evil in men, and the troubles they bring upon
themselves, his heart filled with pity.
'It is wrong of me to live as I do,' he said to himself. 'I must go and teach
others what I have myself learnt.'
Hardly had he thought this, when he heard the robber approaching. He let
him pass, thinking:
'It is no good talking to him, he will not understand.'
That was his first thought, but ho changed his mind and went out into the
road. He saw that the robber was gloomy, and was riding with downcast eyes.
The godson looked at him, pitied him, and running up to him laid his hand upon
his knee.
'Brother, dear,' said he, 'have some pity on your own soul! In you lives the
spirit of God. You suffer, and torment others, and lay up more and more
suffering for the future. Yet God loves you, and has prepared such blessings for
you. Do not ruin yourself utterly. Change your life!'
The robber frowned and turned away.
'Leave me alone!' said he.
But the godson held the robber still faster, and began to weep.
Then the robber lifted his eyes and looked at the godson. He looked at him
for a long time, and alighting from his horse, fell on his knees at the godson's
feet.
'You have overcome me, old man,' said he. 'For twenty years I have
resisted you, but now you have conquered me. Do what you will with me, for I
have no more power over myself. When you first tried to persuade me, it only
angered me more. Only when you hid yourself from men did I begin to consider
your words: for I saw then that you asked nothing of them for yourself. Since
that day I have brought food for you, hanging it upon the tree.'
Then the godson remembered that the woman got her table clean only
after she had rinsed her cloth. In the same way, it was only when he ceased
caring about himself, and cleansed his own heart, that he was able to cleanse the
hearts of others.
The robber went on.
'When I saw that you did not fear death, my heart turned.'
Then the godson remembered that the wheel-wrights could not bend the
rims until they had fixed their block. So, not till he had cast away the fear of
death and made his life fast in God, could he subdue this man's unruly heart.
'But my heart did not quite melt,' continued the robber, 'until you pitied
me and wept for me.'
The godson, full of joy, led the robber to the place where the stumps were.
And when they got there, they saw that from the third stump an apple-tree had
begun to sprout. And the godson remembered that the drovers had not been able
147

to light the damp wood until the fire had burnt up well. So it was only when his
own heart burnt warmly, that another's heart had been kindled by it.
And the godson was full of joy that he had at last atoned for his sins.
He told all this to the robber, and died. The robber buried him, and lived
as the godson had commanded him, teaching to others what the godson had
taught him.
1886.

148

17

THE REPENTANT SINNER
'And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy
Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, Today shalt thou be
with me in paradise.' -- Luke xxiii. 42, 43.
THERE was once a man who lived for seventy years in the world, and lived in
sin all that time. He fell ill but even then did not repent. Only at the last moment,
as he was dying, he wept and said:
'Lord! forgive me, as Thou forgavest the thief upon the cross.'
And as he said these words, his soul left his body. And the soul of the
sinner, feeling love towards God and faith in His mercy, went to the gates of
heaven and knocked, praying to be let into the heavenly kingdom.
Then a voice spoke from within the gate:
'What man is it that knocks at the gates of Paradise and what deeds did he
do during his life?'
And the voice of the Accuser replied, recounting all the man's evil deeds,
and not a single good one.
And the voice from within the gates answered:
'Sinners cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Go hence!'
Then the man said:
'Lord, I hear thy voice, but cannot see thy face, nor do I know thy name.'
The voice answered:
'I am Peter, the Apostle.'
And the sinner replied:
'Have pity on me, Apostle Peter! Remember man's weakness, and God's
mercy. Wert not thou a disciple of Christ? Didst not thou hear his teaching from
his own lips, and hadst thou not his example before thee? Remember then how,
when he sorrowed and was grieved in spirit, and three times asked thee to keep
awake and pray, thou didst sleep, because thine eyes were heavy, and three
times he found thee sleeping. So it was with me. Remember, also, how thou didst
promise to be faithful unto death, and yet didst thrice deny him, when he was
taken before Caiaphas. So it was with me. And remember, too, how when the
cock crowed thou didst go out and didst weep bitterly. So it is with me. Thou
canst not refuse to let me in.'
And the voice behind the gates was silent.
Then the sinner stood a little while, and again began to knock, and to ask
to be let into the kingdom of heaven.
And he heard another voice behind the gates, which said:
'Who is this man, and how did he live on earth?'
And the voice of the Accuser again repeated all the sinner's evil deeds,
and not a single good one.
And the voice from behind the gates replied:
149

'Go hence! Such sinners cannot live with us in Paradise.' Then the sinner
said:
'Lord, I hear thy voice, but I see thee not, nor do I know thy name.'
And the voice answered:
'I am David; king and prophet.'
The sinner did not despair, nor did he leave the gates of Paradise, but said:
Have pity on me, King David! Remember man's weakness, and God's
mercy. God loved thee and exalted thee among men. Thou hadst all: a kingdom,
and honour, and riches, and wives, and children; but thou sawest from thy
house-top the wife of a poor man, and sin entered into thee, and thou tookest the
wife of Uriah, and didst slay him with the sword of the Ammonites. Thou, a rich
man, didst take from the poor man his one ewe lamb, and didst kill him. I have
done likewise. Remember, then, how thou didst repent, and how thou saidst, "I
acknowledge my transgressions: my sin is ever before me?" I have done the
same. Thou canst not refuse to let me in.'
And the voice from within the gates was silent.
The sinner having stood a little while, began knocking again, and asking
to be let into the kingdom of heaven. And a third voice was heard within the
gates, saying:
'Who is this man, and how has he spent his life on earth?'
And the voice of the Accuser replied for the third time, recounting the
sinner's evil deeds, and not mentioning one good deed.
And the voice within the gates said:
'Depart hence! Sinners cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.'
And the sinner said:
'Thy voice I hear, but thy face I see not, neither do I know thy name.'
Then the voice replied:
'I am John the Divine, the beloved disciple of Christ.'
And the sinner rejoiced and said:
'Now surely I shall be allowed to enter. Peter and David must let me in,
because they know man's weakness and God's mercy; and thou wilt let me in,
because thou lovest much. Was it not thou, John the Divine who wrote that God
is Love, and that he who loves not, knows not God? And in thine old age didst
thou not say unto men: "Brethren, love one another." How, then, canst thou look
on me with hatred, and drive me away? Either thou must renounce what thou
hast said, or loving me, must let me enter the kingdom of heaven.'
And the gates of Paradise opened, and John embraced the repentant
sinner and took him into the kingdom of heaven.
1886.

150

18

THE EMPTY DRUM
(A FOLK-TALE LONG CURRENT IN THE REGION OF THE
VOLGA)
EMELYÁN was a labourer and worked for a master. Crossing the meadows one
day on his way to work, he nearly trod on a frog that jumped right in front of
him, but he just managed to avoid it. Suddenly he heard some one calling to him
from behind.
Emelyán looked round and saw a lovely lassie, who said to him: 'Why
don't you get married, Emelyán?'
'How can I marry, my lass?' said he. 'I have but the clothes I stand up in,
nothing more, and no one would have me for a husband.'
'Take me for a wife,' said she.
Emelyán liked the maid. 'I should be glad to,' said he, 'but where and how
could we live?'
'Why trouble about that?' said the girl. 'One only has to work more and
sleep less, and one can clothe and feed oneself anywhere.'
'Very well then, let us marry,' said Emelyán. 'Where shall we go to?'
'Let us go to town.'
So Emelyán and the lass went to town, and she took him to a small hut on
the very edge of the town, and they married and began housekeeping.
One day the King, driving through the town, passed by Emelyán's hut.
Emelyán's wife came out to see the King. The King noticed her and was quite
surprised.
'Where did such a beauty come from?' said he and stopping his carriage
he called Emelyán's wife and asked her: 'Who are you?'
'The peasant Emelyán's wife,' said she.
'Why did you, who are such a beauty, marry a peasant?' said the King.
'You ought to be a queen!'
'Thank you for your kind words,' said she, 'but a peasant husband is good
enough for me.'
The King talked to her awhile and then drove on. He returned to the
palace, but could not get Emelyán's wife out of his head. All night he did not
sleep, but kept thinking how to get her for himself. He could think of no way of
doing it, so he called his servants and told them they must find a way.
The King's servants said: 'Command Emelyán to come to the palace to
work, and we will work him so hard that he will die. His wife will be left a
widow, and then you can take her for yourself.'
The King followed their advice. He sent an order that Emelyán should
come to the palace as a workman and that he should live at the palace, and his
wife with him.
The messengers came to Emelyán and gave him the King's message. His
wife said, 'Go, Emelyán; work all day, but come back home at night.'
151

So Emelyán went, and when he got to the palace the King's steward asked
him, 'Why have you come alone, without your wife?'
'Why should I drag her about?' said Emelyán. 'She has a house to live in.'
At the King's palace they gave Emelyán work enough for two. He began
the job not hoping to finish it; but when evening came, lo and behold! it was all
done. The steward saw that it was finished, and set him four times as much for
next day.
Emelyán went home. Everything there was swept and tidy; the oven was
heated, his supper was cooked and ready, and his wife sat by the table sewing
and waiting for his return. She greeted him, laid the table, gave him to eat and
drink, and then began to ask him about his work.
'Ah!' said he, 'it's a bad business: they give me tasks beyond my strength,
and want to kill me with work.'
'Don't fret about the work,' said she, 'don't look either before or behind to
see how much you have done or how much there is left to do; only keep on
working and all will be right.'
So Emelyán lay down and slept. Next morning he went to work again and
worked without once looking round. And, lo and behold! by the evening it was
all done, and before dark he came home for the night.
Again and again they increased Emelyán's work, but he always got
through it in good time and went back to his hut to sleep. A week passed, and
the King's servants saw they could not crush him with rough work so they tried
giving him work that required skill. But this, also, was of no avail. Carpentering,
and masonry, and roofing, whatever they set him to do, Emelyán had it ready in
time, and went home to his wife at night. So a second week passed.
Then the King called his servants and said: 'Am I to feed you for nothing?
Two weeks have gone, and I don't see that you have done anything. You were
going to tire Emelyán out with work, but I see from my windows how he goes
home every evening -- singing cheerfully! Do you mean to make a fool of me?'
The King's servants began to excuse themselves. 'We tried our best to wear
him out with rough work,' they said, 'but nothing was too hard for him; he
cleared it all off as though he had swept it away with a broom. There was no
tiring him out. Then we set him to tasks needing skill, which we did not think he
was clever enough to do, but he managed them all. No matter what one sets him,
he does it all, no one knows how. Either he or his wife must know some spell that
helps them. We ourselves are sick of him, and wish to find a task he cannot
master. We have now thought of setting him to build a cathedral in a single day.
Send for Emelyán, and order him to build a cathedral in front of the palace in a
single day. Then, if he does not do it, let his head be cut off for disobedience.'
The King sent for Emelyán. 'Listen to my command,' said he: 'build me a
new cathedral on the square in front of my palace, and have it ready by tomorrow evening. If you have it ready I will reward you, but if not I will have
your head cut off.'
When Emelyán heard the King's command he turned away and went
home. 'My end is near,' thought he. And coming to his wife, he said: 'Get ready,
wife we must fly from here, or I shall be lost by no fault of my own.'
'What has frightened you so?' said she, 'and why should we run away?'
152

'How can I help being frightened? The King has ordered me, to-morrow,
in a single day, to build him a cathedral. If I fail he will cut my head off. There is
only one thing to be done: we must fly while there is yet time.'
But his wife would not hear of it. 'The King has many soldiers,' said she.
'They would catch us anywhere. We cannot escape from him, but must obey him
as long as strength holds out.'
'How can I obey him when the task is beyond my strength?'
'Eh, goodman, don't be downhearted. Eat your supper now, and go to
sleep. Rise early in the morning and all will get done.'
So Emelyán lay down and slept. His wife roused him early next day. 'Go
quickly,' said she, 'and finish the cathedral. Here are nails and a hammer; there is
still enough work there for a day.'
Emelyán went into the town, reached the palace square, and there stood a
large cathedral not quite finished. Emelyán set to work to do what was needed,
and by the evening all was ready.
When the King awoke he looked out from his palace, and saw the
cathedral, and Emelyán going about driving in nails here and there. And the
King was not pleased to have the cathedral -- he was annoyed at not being able to
condemn Emelyán and take his wife. Again he called his servants. 'Emelyán has
done this task also,' said the King, 'and there is no excuse for putting him to
death. Even this work was not too hard for him. You must find a more cunning
plan, or I will cut off your heads as well as his.'
So his servants planned that Emelyán should be ordered to make a river
round the palace, with ships sailing on it. And the King sent for Emelyán and set
him this new task.
'If,' said he, 'you could build a cathedral in one night, you can also do this.
To-morrow all must be ready. If not, I will have your head off.'
Emelyán was more downcast than before, and returned to his wife sad at
heart.
'Why are you so sad?' said his wife. 'Has the King set you a fresh task?'
Emelyán told her about it. 'We must fly,' said he.
But his wife replied: 'There is no escaping the soldiers; they will catch us
wherever we go. There is nothing for it but to obey.'
'How can I do it?' groaned Emelyán.
'Eh! eh! goodman,' said she, 'don't be downhearted. Eat your supper now,
and go to sleep. Rise early, and all will get done in good time.'
So Emelyán lay down and slept. In the morning his wife woke him. 'Go,'
said she 'to the palace -- all is ready. Only, near the wharf in front of the palace,
there is a mound left; take a spade and level it.
When the King awoke he saw a river where there had not been one; ships
were sailing up and down, and Emelyán was levelling a mound with a spade.
The King wondered, but was pleased neither with the river nor with the ships, so
vexed was he at not being able to condemn Emelyán. 'There is no task,' thought
he, 'that he cannot manage. What is to be done?' And he called his servants and
again asked their advice.
'Find some task,' said he, 'which Emelyán cannot compass. For whatever
we plan he fulfils, and I cannot take his wife from him.'
153

The King's servants thought and thought, and at last devised a plan. They
came to the King and said: 'Send for Emelyán and say to him: "Go to there, don't
know where," and bring back "that, don't know what." Then he will not be able to
escape you. No matter where he goes, you can say that he has not gone to the
right place, and no matter what he brings, you can say it is not the right thing.
Then you can have him beheaded and can take his wife.'
The King was pleased. 'That is well thought of,' said he. So the King sent
for Emelyán and said to him: 'Go to "there, don't know where," and bring back
"that, don't know what." If you fail to bring it, I will have you beheaded.'
Emelyán returned to his wife and told her what the King had said. His
wife became thoughtful.
'Well,' said she, 'they have taught the King how to catch you. Now we
must act warily.' So she sat and thought, and at last said to her husband: 'You
must go far, to our Grandam -- the old peasant woman, the mother of soldiers -and you must ask her aid. If she helps you to anything, go straight to the palace
with it, I shall be there: I cannot escape them now. They will take me by force, but
it will not be for long. If you do everything as Grandam directs, you will soon
save me.'
So the wife got her husband ready for the journey. She gave him a wallet,
and also a spindle. 'Give her this,' said she. 'By this token she will know that you
are my husband.' And his wife showed him his road.
Emelyán set off. He left the town behind, and came to where some soldiers
were being drilled. Emelyán stood and watched them. After drill the soldiers sat
down to rest. Then Emelyán went up to them and asked: 'Do you know, brothers,
the way to "there, don't know where?" and how I can get "that, don't know
what?"'
The soldiers listened to him with surprise. 'Who sent you on this errand?'
said they
'The King,' said he.
'We ourselves,' said they, 'from the day we became soldiers, go we "don't
know where," and never yet have we got there; and we seek we "don't know
what," and cannot find it. We cannot help you.'
Emelyán sat a while with the soldiers and then went on again. He trudged
many a mile, and at last came to a wood. In the wood was a hut, and in the hut
sat an old, old woman, the mother of peasant soldiers, spinning flax and
weeping. And as she spun she did not put her fingers to her mouth to wet them
with spittle, but to her eyes to wet them with tears. When the old woman saw
Emelyán she cried out at him: 'Why have you come here?' Then Emelyán gave
her the spindle, and said his wife had sent it.
The old woman softened at once, and began to question him. And
Emelyán told her his whole life: how he married the lass; how they went to live
in the town; how he had worked, and what he had done at the palace; how he
built the cathedral, and made a river with ships on it, and how the King had now
told him to go to 'there, don't know where, and bring back 'that, don't know
what.'

154

The Grandam listened to the end, and ceased weeping. She muttered to
herself: 'The time has surely come,' and said to him: 'All right, my lad. Sit down
now, and I will give you something to eat.'
Emelyán ate, and then the Grandam told him what to do. 'Here,' said she,
'is a ball of thread; roll it before you, and follow where it goes. You must go far
till you come right to the sea. When you get there you will see a great city. Enter
the city and ask for a night's lodging at the furthest house. There look out for
what you are seeking.'
'How shall I know it when I see it, Granny?' said he.
'When you see something men obey more than father or mother, that is it.
Seize that, and take it to the King. When you bring it to the King, he will say it is
not right, and you must answer: "If it is not the right thing it must be smashed,"
and you must beat it, and carry it to the river, break it in pieces, and throw it into
the water. Then you will get your wife back and my tears will be dried.'
Emelyán bade farewell to the Grandam and began rolling his ball before
him. It rolled and rolled until at last it reached the sea. By the sea stood a great
city, and at the further end of the city was a big house. There Emelyán begged for
a night's lodging, and was granted it. He lay down to sleep, and in the morning
awoke and heard a father rousing his son to go and cut wood for the fire. But the
son did not obey. 'It is too early,' said he, 'there is time enough.' Then Emelyán
heard the mother say, 'Go, my son, your father's bones ache; would you have
him go himself? It is time to be up!'
But the son only murmured some words and fell asleep again. Hardly was
he asleep when something thundered and rattled in the street. Up jumped the
son and quickly putting on his clothes ran out into the street. Up jumped
Emelyán, too, and ran after him to see what it was that a son obeys more than
father or mother. What he saw was a man walking along the street carrying, tied
to his stomach, a thing which he beat with sticks, and that it was that rattled and
thundered so, and that the son had obeyed. Emelyán ran up and had a look at it.
He saw it was round, like a small tub, with a skin stretched over both ends, and
he asked what it was called.
He was told, 'A drum.'
'And is it empty?'
'Yes, it is empty.'
Emelyán was surprised. He asked them to give the thing to him, but they
would not. So Emelyán left off asking, and followed the drummer. All day he
followed, and when the drummer at last lay down to sleep, Emelyán snatched
the drum from him and ran away with it.
He ran and ran, till at last he got back to his own town. He went to see his
wife, but she was not at home. The day after he went away, the King had taken
her. So Emelyán went to the palace, and sent in a message to the King: 'He has
returned who went to "there, don't know where," and he has brought with him
"that, don't know what."'
They told the King, and the King said he was to come again next day.
But Emelyán said, 'Tell the King I am here to-day, and have brought what
the King wanted. Let him come out to me, or I will go in to him!'
The King came out. 'Where have you been?' said he.
155

Emelyán told him.
'That's not the right place,' said the King. 'What have you brought?'
Emelyán pointed to the drum, but the King did not look at it.
'That is not it.'
'If it is not the right thing,' said Emelyán, 'it must be smashed, and may the
devil take it!'
And Emelyán left the palace, carrying the drum and beating it. And as he
beat it all the King's army ran out to follow Emelyán, and they saluted him and
waited his commands.
The King, from his window, began to shout at his army telling them not to
follow Emelyán. They did not listen to what he said, but all followed Emelyán.
When the King saw that, he gave orders that Emelyán's wife should be
taken back to him, and he sent to ask Emelyán to give him the drum.
'It can't be done,' said Emelyán. 'I was told to smash it and to throw the
splinters into the river.'
So Emelyán went down to the river carrying the drum, and the soldiers
followed him. When he reached the river bank Emelyán smashed the drum to
splinters, and threw the splinters into the stream. And then all the soldiers ran
away.
Emelyán took his wife and went home with her. And after that the King
ceased to trouble him; and so they lived happily ever after.
1891.

156

PART VI

ADAPTATIONS FROM THE FRENCH
19

THE COFFEE-HOUSE OF SURAT
(AFTER BERNARDIN DE SENT-PIERRE.)
IN the town of Surat, in India, was a coffee-house where many travellers and
foreigners from all parts of the world met and conversed.
One day a learned Persian theologian visited this coffee-house. He was a
man who had spent his life studying the nature of the Deity, and reading and
writing books upon the subject. He had thought, read, and written so much
about God, that eventually he lost his wits became quite confused, and ceased
even to believe in the existence of a God. The Shah, hearing of this, had banished
him from Persia.
After having argued all his life about the First Cause, this unfortunate
theologian had ended by quite perplexing himself, and instead of understanding
that he had lost his own reason, he began to think that there was no higher
Reason controlling the universe.
This man had an African slave who followed him everywhere. When the
theologian entered the coffeehouse, the slave remained outside, near the door
sitting on a stone in the glare of the sun, and driving away the flies that buzzed
around him. The Persian having settled down on a divan in the coffee-house,
ordered himself a cup of opium. When he had drunk it and the opium had begun
to quicken the workings of his brain, he addressed his slave through the open
door:
'Tell me, wretched slave,' said he, 'do you think there is a God, or not?'
'Of course there is,' said the slave, and immediately drew from under his
girdle a small idol of wood.
'There,' said he, 'that is the God who has guarded me from the day of my
birth. Every one in our country worships the fetish tree, from the wood of which
this God was made.'
This conversation between the theologian and his slave was listened to
with surprise by the other guests in the coffee-house. They were astonished at the
master's question, and yet more so at the slave's reply.
One of them, a Brahmin, on hearing the words spoken by the slave, turned
to him and said:
'Miserable fool! Is it possible you believe that God can be carried under a
man's girdle? There is one God -- Brahma, and he is greater than the whole
world, for he created it. Brahma is the One, the mighty God, and in His honour
are built the temples on the Ganges' banks, where his true priests, the Brahmins,
worship him. They know the true God, and none but they. A thousand score of
years have passed, and yet through revolution after revolution these priests have
held their sway, because Brahma, the one true God, has protected them.'
157

So spoke the Brahmin, thinking to convince every one; but a Jewish broker
who was present replied to him, and said:
'No! the temple of the true God is not in India. Neither does God protect
the Brahmin caste. The true God is not the God of the Brahmins, but of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. None does He protect but His chosen people, the Israelites.
From the commencement of the world, our nation has been beloved of Him, and
ours alone. If we are now scattered over the whole earth it is but to try us; for
God has promised that He will one day gather His people together in Jerusalem.
Then, with the Temple of Jerusalem -- the wonder of the ancient world -- restored
to its splendour, shall Israel be established a ruler over all nations.'
So spoke the Jew, and burst into tears. He wished to say more, but an
Italian missionary who was there interrupted him.
'What you are saying is untrue,' said he to the Jew. 'You attribute injustice
to God. He cannot love your nation above the rest. Nay rather, even if it be true
that of old He favoured the Israelites, it is now nineteen hundred years since they
angered Him, and caused Him to destroy their nation and scatter them over the
earth, so that their faith makes no converts and has died out except here and
there. God shows preference to no nation, but calls all who wish to be saved to
the bosom of the Catholic Church of Rome, the one outside whose borders no
salvation can be found.'
So spoke the Italian. But a Protestant minister who happened to be
present, growing pale, turned to the Catholic missionary and exclaimed:
'How can you say that salvation belongs to your religion? Those only will
be saved, who serve God according to the Gospel, in spirit and in truth, as
bidden by the word of Christ.'
Then a Turk, an office-holder in the custom-house at Surat, who was
sitting in the coffee-house smoking a pipe, turned with an air of superiority to
both the Christians.
'Your belief in your Roman religion is vain,' said he. 'It was superseded
twelve hundred years ago by the true faith: that of Mohammed! You cannot but
observe how the true Mohammedan faith continues to spread both in Europe
and Asia, and even in the enlightened country of China. You say yourselves that
God has rejected the Jews; and, as a proof, you quote the fact that the Jews are
humiliated and their faith does not spread. Confess then the truth of
Mohammedanism, for it is triumphant and spreads far and wide. None will be
saved but the followers of Mohammed, God's latest prophet; and of them, only
the followers of Omar, and not of Ali, for the latter are false to the faith.'
To this the Persian theologian, who was of the sect of Ali, wished to reply;
but by this time a great dispute had arisen among all the strangers of different
faiths and creeds present. There were Abyssinian Christians, Llamas from Thibet,
Ismailians and Fire-worshippers. They all argued about the nature of God, and
how He should be worshipped. Each of them asserted that in his country alone
was the true God known and rightly worshipped.
Every one argued and shouted, except a Chinaman, a student of
Confucius, who sat quietly in one corner of the coffee-house, not joining in the
dispute. He sat there drinking tea and listening to what the others said, but did
not speak himself.
158

The Turk noticed him sitting there, and appealed to him, saying:
'You can confirm what I say, my good Chinaman. You hold your peace,
but if you spoke I know you would uphold my opinion. Traders from your
country, who come to me for assistance, tell me that though many religions have
been introduced into China, you Chinese consider Mohammedanism the best of
all, and adopt it willingly. Confirm, then, my words, and tell us your opinion of
the true God and of His prophet.'
'Yes, yes,' said the rest, turning to the Chinaman, 'let us hear what you
think on the subject.'
The Chinaman, the student of Confucius, closed his eyes, and thought a
while. Then he opened them again, and drawing his hands out of the wide
sleeves of his garment, and folding them on his breast, he spoke as follows, in a
calm and quiet voice.
Sirs, it seems to me that it is chiefly pride that prevents men agreeing with
one another on matters of faith. If you care to listen to me, I will tell you a story
which will explain this by an example.
I came here from China on an English steamer which had been round the
world. We stopped for fresh water, and landed on the east coast of the island of
Sumatra. It was mid-day, and some of us, having landed, sat in the shade of
some coconut palms by the seashore, not far from a native village. We were a
party of men of different nationalities.
As we sat there, a blind man approached us. We learnt afterwards that he
had gone blind from gazing too long and too persistently at the sun, trying to
find out what it is, in order to seize its light.
He strove a long time to accomplish this, constantly looking at the sun; but
the only result was that his eyes were injured by its brightness, and he became
blind.
Then he said to himself:
'The light of the sun is not a liquid; for if it were a liquid it would be
possible to pour it from one vessel into another, and it would be moved, like
water, by the wind. Neither is it fire; for if it were fire, water would extinguish it.
Neither is light a spirit, for it is seen by the eye, nor is it matter, for it cannot be
moved. Therefore, as the light of the sun is neither liquid, nor fire, nor spirit, nor
matter, it is -- nothing!'
So he argued, and, as a result of always looking at the sun and always
thinking about it, he lost both his sight and his reason. And when he went quite
blind, he became fully convinced that the sun did not exist.
With this blind man came a slave, who after placing his master in the
shade of a coconut tree, picked up a coconut from the ground, and began making
it into a night-light. He twisted a wick from the fibre of the coconut: squeezed oil
from the nut into the shell, and soaked the wick in it.
As the slave sat doing this, the blind man sighed and said to him:
'Well, slave, was I not right when I told you there is no sun? Do you not
see how dark it is? Yet people say there is a sun. . . . But if so, what is it?'
'I do not know what the sun is,' said the slave 'That is no business of mine.
But I know what light is. Here, I have made a night-light, by the help of which I
can serve you and find anything I want in the hut.'
159

And the slave picked up the coconut shell, saying:
'This is my sun.'
A lame man with crutches, who was sitting near by heard these words,
and laughed:
'You have evidently been blind all your life,' said he to the blind man, 'not
to know what the sun is, I will tell you what it is. The sun is a ball of fire, which
rises every morning out of the sea and goes down again among the mountains of
our island each evening. We have all seen this, and if you had had your eyesight
you too would have seen it.'
A fisherman, who had been listening to the conversation, said:
'It is plain enough that you have never been beyond your own island. If
you were not lame, and if you had been out as I have in a fishing-boat, you
would know that the sun does not set among the mountains of our island, but as
it rises from the ocean every morning so it sets again in the sea every night. What
I am telling you is true, for I see it every day with my own eyes.'
Then an Indian who was of our party, interrupted him by saying:
'I am astonished that a reasonable man should talk such nonsense. How
can a ball of fire possibly descend into the water and not be extinguished? The
sun is not a ball of fire at all, it is the Deity named Deva who rides for ever in a
chariot round the golden mountain, Meru. Sometimes the evil serpents Ragu and
Ketu attack Deva and swallow him: and then the earth is dark. But our priests
pray that the Deity may be released, and then he is set free. Only such ignorant
men as you, who have never been beyond their own island, can imagine that the
sun shines for their country alone.'
Then the master of an Egyptian vessel, who was present, spoke in his turn.
'No,' said he, 'you also are wrong. The sun is not a Deity, and does not
move only round India and its golden mountain. I have sailed much on the Black
Sea, and along the coasts of Arabia, and have been to Madagascar and to the
Philippines. The sun lights the whole earth, and not India alone. It does not circle
round one mountain, but rises far in the east, beyond the Isles of Japan, and sets
far, far away in the west, beyond the islands of England. That is why the
Japanese call their country "Nippon," that is "the birth of the sun." I know this
well, for I have myself seen much, and heard more from my grandfather, who
sailed to the very ends of the sea.'
He would have gone on, but an English sailor from our ship interrupted
him.
'There is no country,' he said, 'where people know so much about the sun's
movements as in England. The sun, as every one in England knows, rises
nowhere and sets nowhere. It is always moving round the earth. We can be sure
of this for we have just been round the world ourselves, and nowhere knocked
up against the sun. Wherever we went, the sun showed itself in the morning and
hid itself at night, just as it does here.'
And the Englishman took a stick and, drawing circles on the sand, tried to
explain how the sun moves in the heavens and goes round the world. But he was
unable to explain it clearly, and pointing to the ship's pilot said:
'This man knows more about it than I do. He can explain it properly.'
160

The pilot, who was an intelligent man, had listened in silence to the talk
till he was asked to speak. Now every one turned to him, and he said:
'You are all misleading one another, and are yourselves deceived. The sun
does not go round the earth, but the earth goes round the sun, revolving as it
goes and turning towards the sun in the course of each twenty-four hours, not
only Japan, and the Philippines and Sumatra where we now are, but Africa, and
Europe and America, and many lands besides. The sun does not shine for some
one mountain, or for some one island, or for some one sea, nor even for one earth
alone, but for other planets as well as our earth. If you would only look up at the
heavens, instead of at the ground beneath your own feet, you might all
understand this, and would then no longer suppose that the sun shines for you,
or for your country alone.'
Thus spoke the wise pilot, who had voyaged much about the world, and
had gazed much upon the heavens above.
'So on matters of faith,' continued the Chinaman the student of Confucius,
'it is pride that causes error and discord among men. As with the sun, so it is
with God. Each man wants to have a special God of his own, or at least a special
God for his native land. Each nation wishes to confine in its own temples Him,
whom the world cannot contain.
'Can any temple compare with that which God Himself has built to unite
all men in one faith and one religion?
'All human temples are built on the model of this temple, which is God's
own world. Every temple has its fonts, its vaulted roof, its lamps, its pictures or
sculptures, its inscriptions, its books of the law, its offerings, its altars and its
priests. But in what temple is there such a font as the ocean; such a vault as that
of the heavens; such lamps as the sun, moon, and stars; or any figures to be
compared with living, loving, mutually-helpful men? Where are there any
records of God's goodness so easy to understand as the blessings which God has
strewn abroad for man's happiness? Where is there any book of the law so clear
to each man as that written in his heart? What sacrifices equal the self-denials
which loving men and women make for one another? And what altar can be
compared with the heart of a good man, on which God Himself accepts the
sacrifice?
'The higher a man's conception of God, the better will he know Him. And
the better he knows God, the nearer will he draw to Him, imitating His
goodness, His mercy, and His love of man.
'Therefore, let him who sees the sun's whole light filling the world, refrain
from blaming or despising the superstitious man, who in his own idol sees one
ray of that same light. Let him not despise even the unbeliever who is blind and
cannot see the sun at all.'
So spoke the Chinaman, the student of Confucius; and all who were
present in the coffee-house were silent, and disputed no more as to whose faith
was the best.
1893.

161

20

TOO DEAR!
(TOLSTOY'S ADAPTATION OF A STORY BY GUY DE
MAUPASSANT. )
NEAR the borders of France and Italy, on the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, lies
a tiny little kingdom called Monaco. Many a small country town can boast more
inhabitants than this kingdom, for there are only about seven thousand of them
all told, and if all the land in the kingdom were divided there would not be an
acre for each inhabitant. But in this toy kingdom there is a real kinglet; and he
has a palace, and courtiers, and ministers, and a bishop, and generals, and an
army.
It is not a large army, only sixty men in all, but still it is an army. There
were also taxes in this kingdom as elsewhere: a tax on tobacco, and on wine and
spirits and a poll-tax. But though the people there drink and smoke as people do
in other countries, there are so few of them that the King would have been hard
put to it to feed his courtiers and officials and to keep himself, if he had not
found a new and special source of revenue. This special revenue comes from a
gaming house, where people play roulette. People play, and whether they win or
lose the keeper always gets a percentage on the turnover; and out of his profits
he pays a large sum to the King. The reason he pays so much is that it is the only
such gambling establishment left in Europe. Some of the little German
Sovereigns used to keep gaming houses of the same kind, but some years ago
they were forbidden to do so. The reason they were stopped was because these
gaming houses did so much harm. A man would come and try his luck, then he
would risk all he had and lose it, then he would even risk money that did not
belong to him and lose that too, and then, in despair, he would drown or shoot
himself. So the Germans forbade their rulers to make money in this way; but
there was no one to stop the King of Monaco, and he remained with a monopoly
of the business.
So now every one who wants to gamble goes to Monaco. Whether they
win or lose, the King gains by it. 'You can't earn stone palaces by honest labour,'
as the proverb says; and the Kinglet of Monaco knows it is a dirty business, but
what is he to do? He has to live; and to draw a revenue from drink and from
tobacco is also not a nice thing. So he lives and reigns, and rakes in the money,
and holds his court with all the ceremony of a real king.
He has his coronation, his levees; he rewards, sentences, and pardons, and
he also has his reviews, councils, laws, and courts of justice: just like other kings,
only all on a smaller scale.
Now it happened a few years ago that a murder was committed in this toy
King's domains. The people of that kingdom are peaceable, and such a thing had
not happened before. The judges assembled with much ceremony and tried the
case in the most judicial manner. There were judges, and prosecutors, and
jurymen, and barristers. They argued and judged, and at last they condemned
162

the criminal to have his head cut off as the law directs. So far so good. Next they
submitted the sentence to the King. The King read the sentence and confirmed it.
'If the fellow must be executed, execute him.'
There was only one hitch in the matter; and that was that they had neither
a guillotine for cutting heads off, nor an executioner. The Ministers considered
the matter, and decided to address an inquiry to the French Government, asking
whether the French could not lend them a machine and an expert to cut off the
criminal's head; and if so, would the French kindly inform them what the cost
would be. The letter was sent. A week later the reply came: a machine and an
expert could be supplied, and the cost would be 16,000 francs. This was laid
before the King. He thought it over. Sixteen thousand francs! 'The wretch is not
worth the money,' said he. 'Can't it be done, somehow, cheaper? Why 16,000
francs is more than two francs a head on the whole population. The people won't
stand it, and it may cause a riot!'
So a Council was called to consider what could be done; and it was
decided to send a similar inquiry to the King of Italy. The French Government is
republican, and has no proper respect for kings; but the King of Italy was a
brother monarch, and might be induced to do the thing cheaper. So the letter was
written, and a prompt reply was received.
The Italian Government wrote that they would have pleasure in supplying
both a machine and an expert; and the whole cost would be 12,000 francs,
including travelling expenses. This was cheaper, but still it seemed too much.
The rascal was really not worth the money. It would still mean nearly two francs
more per head on the taxes. Another Council was called. They discussed and
considered how it could be done with less expense. Could not one of the soldiers
perhaps be got to do it in a rough and homely fashion? The General was called
and was asked: 'Can't you find us a soldier who would cut the man's head off? In
war they don't mind killing people. In fact, that is what they are trained for.' So
the General talked it over with the soldiers to see whether one of them would not
undertake the job. But none of the soldiers would do it. 'No,' they said, 'we don't
know how to do it; it is not a thing we have been taught.'
What was to be done? Again the Ministers considered and reconsidered.
They assembled a Commission, and a Committee, and a Sub-Committee, and at
last they decided that the best thing would be to alter the death sentence to one
of imprisonment for life. This would enable the King to show his mercy, and it
would come cheaper.
The King agreed to this, and so the matter was arranged. The only hitch
now was that there was no suitable prison for a man sentenced for life. There was
a small lock-up where people were sometimes kept temporarily, but there was
no strong prison fit for permanent use. However, they managed to find a place
that would do, and they put the young fellow there and placed a guard over him.
The guard had to watch the criminal, and had also to fetch his food from the
palace kitchen.
The prisoner remained there month after month till a year had passed. But
when a year had passed, the Kinglet, looking over the account of his income and
expenditure one day, noticed a new item of expenditure. This was for the keep of
the criminal; nor was it a small item either. There was a special guard, and there
163

was also the man's food. It came to more than 600 francs a year. And the worst of
it was that the fellow was still young and healthy, and might live for fifty years.
When one came to reckon it up, the matter was serious. It would never do. So the
King summoned his Ministers and said to them:
'You must find some cheaper way of dealing with this rascal. The present
plan is too expensive.' And the Ministers met and considered and reconsidered,
till one of them said: 'Gentlemen, in my opinion we must dismiss the guard.' 'But
then,' rejoined another Minister, 'the fellow will run away.' 'Well,' said the first
speaker, 'let him run away, and be hanged to him!' So they reported the result of
their deliberations to the Kinglet, and he agreed with them. The guard was
dismissed, and they waited to see what would happen. All that happened was
that at dinner-time the criminal came out, and, not finding his guard, he went to
the King's kitchen to fetch his own dinner. He took what was given him,
returned to the prison, shut the door on himself, and stayed inside. Next day the
same thing occurred. He went for his food at the proper time; but as for running
away, he did not show the least sign of it! What was to be done? They considered
the matter again.
'We shall have to tell him straight out,' said they 'that we do not want to
keep him.' So the Minister of Justice had him brought before him.
'Why do you not run away?' said the Minister. 'There is no guard to keep
you. You can go where you like, and the King will not mind.'
'I daresay the King would not mind,' replied the man, 'but I have nowhere
to go. What can I do? You have ruined my character by your sentence, and
people will turn their backs on me. Besides, I have got out of the way of working.
You have treated me badly. It is not fair. In the first place, when once you
sentenced me to death you ought to have executed me; but you did not do it.
That is one thing. I did not complain about that. Then you sentenced me to
imprisonment for life and put a guard to bring me my food; but after a time you
took him away again and I had to fetch my own food. Again I did not complain.
But now you actually want me to go away! I can't agree to that. You may do as
you like, but I won't go away!'
What was to be done? Once more the Council was summoned. What
course could they adopt? The man would not go. They reflected and considered.
The only way to get rid of him was to offer him a pension. And so they reported
to the King. 'There is nothing else for it,' said they; 'we must get rid of him
somehow.' The sum fixed was 600 francs, and this was announced to the
prisoner.
'Well,' said he, 'I don't mind, so long as you undertake to pay it regularly.
On that condition I am willing to go.'
So the matter was settled. He received one-third of his annuity in advance,
and left the King's dominions. It was only a quarter of an hour by rail; and he
emigrated, and settled just across the frontier, where he bought a bit of land,
started market-gardening, and now lives comfortably. He always goes at the
proper time to draw his pension. Having received it, he goes to the gaming
tables, stakes two or three francs, sometimes wins and sometimes loses, and then
returns home. He lives peaceably and well.
164

It is a good thing that he did not commit his crime in a country where they
do not grudge expense to cut a man's head off, or to keeping him in prison for
life.
1897.

165

PART VII

STORIES GIVEN TO AID THE PERSECUTED
JEWS
21

ESARHADDON, KING OF ASSYRIA23
THE Assyrian King, Esarhaddon, had conquered the kingdom of King Lailie, had
destroyed and burnt the towns, taken all the inhabitants captive to his own
country, slaughtered the warriors, beheaded some chieftains and impaled or
flayed others, and had confined King Lailie himself in a cage.
As he lay on his bed one night, King Esarhaddon was thinking how he
should execute Lailie, when suddenly he heard a rustling near his bed, and
opening his eyes saw an old man with a long grey bead and mild eyes.
'You wish to execute Lailie?' asked the old man.
'Yes,' answered the King. 'But I cannot make up my mind how to do it.'
'But you are Lailie,' said the old man.
'That's not true,' replied the King. 'Lailie is Lailie, and I am I.'
'You and Lailie are one,' said the old man. 'You only imagine you are not
Lailie, and that Lailie is not you.'
'What do you mean by that?' said the King. 'Here am I, lying on a soft bed;
around me are obedient men-slaves and women-slaves, and to-morrow I shall
feast with my friends as I did to-day; whereas Lailie is sitting like a bird in a cage,
and to-morrow he will be impaled, and with his tongue hanging out will struggle
till he dies, and his body will be torn in pieces by dogs.'
'You cannot destroy his life,' said the old man.
'And how about the fourteen thousand warriors I killed, with whose
bodies I built a mound?' said the King. 'I am alive, but they no longer exist. Does
not that prove that I can destroy life?'
'How do you know they no longer exist?'
'Because I no longer see them. And, above all, they were tormented, but I
was not. It was ill for them, but well for me.'
'That, also, only seems so to you. You tortured yourself, but not them.'
'I do not understand,' said the King.
23In this story Tolstoy has used the names of real people. Esarhaddon (or Assur-akhi-iddina) is

mentioned three times in the Bible (2 Kings xix. 37; Isaiah xxxvii. 38, and Ezra iv. 2), and is also
alluded to in 2 Chron. xxiii. 11, as, 'the King of Assyria, which took Manasseh in chains, and
bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.' His son Assur-bani-pal, whom he promoted
to power before his own death, is once mentioned in the Bible, under the name of Asnapper (Ezra
iv. 10). Of Lailie history does not tell us much; but in Ernest A. Budge's History of Esarhaddon we
read: 'A King, called Lailie, asked that the gods which Esarhaddon had captured from him might
be restored. His request was granted, and Esarhaddon said, "I spoke to him of brotherhood, and
entrusted to him the sovereignty of the districts of Bazu."'

166

'Do you wish to understand?'
'Yes, I do.'
'Then come here,' said the old man, pointing to a large font full of water.
The King rose and approached the font.
'Strip, and enter the font.'
Esarhaddon did as the old man bade him.
'As soon as I begin to pour this water over you,' said the old man, filling a
pitcher with the water, 'dip down your head.'
The old man tilted the pitcher over the King's head and the King bent his
head till it was under water.
And as soon as King Esarhaddon was under the water he felt that he was
no longer Esarhaddon, but some one else. And, feeling himself to be that other
man, he saw himself lying on a rich bed, beside a beautiful woman. He had never
seen her before, but he knew she was his wife. The woman raised herself and
said to him:
'Dear husband, Lailie! You were wearied by yesterday's work and have
slept longer than usual, and I have guarded your rest, and have not roused you.
But now the Princes await you in the Great Hall. Dress and go out to them.'
And Esarhaddon -- understanding from these words that he was Lailie,
and not feeling at all surprised at this, but only wondering that he did not know
it before -- rose, dressed, and went into the Great Hall where the Princes awaited
him.
The Princes greeted Lailie, their King, bowing to the ground, and then
they rose, and at his word sat down before him; and the eldest of the Princes
began to speak, saying that it was impossible longer to endure the insults of the
wicked King Esarhaddon, and that they must make war on him. But Lailie
disagreed, and gave orders that envoys shall be sent to remonstrate with King
Esarhaddon; and he dismissed the Princes from the audience. Afterwards he
appointed men of note to act as ambassadors, and impressed on them what they
were to say to King Esarhaddon. Having finished this business, Esarhaddon -feeling himself to be Lailie -- rode out to hunt wild asses. The hunt was
successful. He killed two wild asses himself, and having returned home, feasted
with his friends, and witnessed a dance of slave girls. The next day he went to
the Court, where he was awaited by petitioners suitors, and prisoners brought
for trial; and there as usual he decided the cases submitted to him. Having
finished this business, he again rode out to his favourite amusement: the hunt.
And again he was successful: this time killing with his own hand an old lioness,
and capturing her two cubs. After the hunt he again feasted with his friends, and
was entertained with music and dances, and the night he spent with the wife
whom he loved.
So, dividing his time between kingly duties and pleasures, he lived for
days and weeks, awaiting the return of the ambassadors he had sent to that King
Esarhaddon who used to be himself. Not till a month had passed did the
ambassadors return, and they returned with their noses and ears cut off.
King Esarhaddon had ordered them to tell Lailie that what had been done
to them -- the ambassadors -- would be done to King Lailie himself also, unless
167

he sent immediately a tribute of silver, gold, and cypress-wood, and came
himself to pay homage to King Esarhaddon.
Lailie, formerly Esarhaddon, again assembled the Princes, and took
counsel with them as to what he should do. They all with one accord said that
war must be made against Esarhaddon, without waiting for him to attack them.
The King agreed; and taking his place at the head of the army, started on the
campaign. The campaign lasts seven days. Each day the King rode round the
army to rouse the courage of his warriors. On the eighth day his army met that of
Esarhaddon in a broad valley through which a river flowed. Lailie's army fought
bravely, but Lailie, formerly Esarhaddon, saw the enemy swarming down from
the mountains like ants, over-running the valley and overwhelming his army;
and, in his chariot, he flung himself into the midst of the battle, hewing and
felling the enemy. But the warriors of Lailie were but as hundreds, while those of
Esarhaddon were as thousands; and Lailie felt himself wounded and taken
prisoner. Nine days he journeyed with other captives, bound, and guarded by
the warriors of Esarhaddon. On the tenth day he reached Nineveh, and was
placed in a cage. Lailie suffered not so much from hunger and from his wound as
from shame and impotent rage. He felt how powerless he was to avenge himself
on his enemy for all he was suffering. All he could do was to deprive his enemies
of the pleasure of seeing his sufferings; and he firmly resolved to endure
courageously without a murmur, all they could do to him. For twenty days he sat
in his cage, awaiting execution. He saw his relatives and friends led out to death;
he heard the groans of those who were executed: some had their hands and feet
cut off, others were flayed alive, but he showed neither disquietude, nor pity, nor
fear. He saw the wife he loved, bound, and led by two black eunuchs. He knew
she was being taken as a slave to Esarhaddon. That, too, he bore without a
murmur. But one of the guards placed to watch him said, 'I pity you, Lailie; you
were a king, but what are you now?' And hearing these words, Lailie
remembered all he had lost. He clutched the bars of his cage, and, wishing to kill
himself, beat his head against them. But he had not the strength to do so and,
groaning in despair, he fell upon the floor of his cage.
At last two executioners opened his cage door, and having strapped his
arms tight behind him, led him to the place of execution, which was soaked with
blood. Lailie saw a sharp stake dripping with blood, from which the corpse of
one of his friends had just been torn, and he understood that this had been done
that the stake might serve for his own execution. They stripped Lailie of his
clothes. He was startled at the leanness of his once strong, handsome body. The
two executioners seized that body by its lean thighs; they lifted him up and were
about to let him fall upon the stake.
'This is death, destruction!' thought Lailie, and, forgetful of his resolve to
remain bravely calm to the end, he sobbed and prayed for mercy. But no one
listened to him.
'But this cannot be,' thought he. 'Surely I am asleep. It is a dream.' And he
made an effort to rouse himself, and did indeed awake, to find himself neither
Esarhaddon nor Lailie -- but some kind of an animal. He was astonished that he
was an animal, and astonished, also, at not having known this before.
168

He was grazing in a valley, tearing the tender grass with his teeth, and
brushing away flies with his long tail. Around him was frolicking a long-legged,
dark-gray ass-colt, striped down its back. Kicking up its hind legs, the colt
galloped full speed to Esarhaddon, and poking him under the stomach with its
smooth little muzzle, searched for the teat, and, finding it, quieted down,
swallowing regularly. Esarhaddon understood that he was a she-ass, the colt's
mother, and this neither surprised nor grieved him, but rather gave him
pleasure. He experienced a glad feeling of simultaneous life in himself and in his
offspring.
But suddenly something flew near with a whistling sound and hit him in
the side, and with its sharp point entered his skin and flesh. Feeling a burning
pain, Esarhaddon -- who was at the same time the ass -- tore the udder from the
colt's teeth, and laying back his ears galloped to the herd from which he had
strayed. The colt kept up with him, galloping by his side. They had already
nearly reached the herd, which had started off, when another arrow in full flight
struck the colt's neck. It pierced the skin and quivered in its flesh. The colt sobbed
piteously and fell upon its knees. Esarhaddon could not abandon it, and
remained standing over it. The colt rose, tottered on its long, thin legs, and again
fell. A fearful two-legged being -- a man -- ran up and cut its throat.
'This cannot be; it is still a dream! thought Esarhaddon, and made a last
effort to awake. 'Surely I am not Lailie, nor the ass, but Esarhaddon!'
He cried out, and at the same instant lifted his head out of the font. . . . The
old man was standing by him, pouring over his head the last drops from the
pitcher.
'Oh, how terribly I have suffered! And for how long!' said Esarhaddon.
'Long?' replied the old man, 'you have only dipped your head under water
and lifted it again; see, the water is not yet all out of the pitcher. Do you now
understand?'
Esarhaddon did not reply, but only looked at the old man with terror.
'Do you now understand,' continued the old man, 'that Lailie is you, and
the warriors you put to death were you also? And not the warriors only, but the
animals which you slew when hunting and ate at your feasts were also you. You
thought life dwelt in you alone but I have drawn aside the veil of delusion, and
have let you see that by doing evil to others you have done it to yourself also.
Life is one in them all, and yours is but a portion of this same common life. And
only in that one part of life that is yours, can you make life better or worse -increasing or decreasing it. You can only improve life in yourself by destroying
the barriers that divide your life from that of others, and by considering others as
yourself, and loving them. By so doing you increase your share of life. You injure
your life when you think of it as the only life, and try to add to its welfare at the
expense of other lives. By so doing you only lessen it. To destroy the life that
dwells in others is beyond your power. The life of those you have slain has
vanished from your eyes, but is not destroyed. You thought to lengthen your
own life and to shorten theirs, but you cannot do this. Life knows neither time
nor space. The life of a moment, and the life of a thousand years: your life and
the life of all the visible and invisible beings in the world, are equal. To destroy
169

life, or to alter it, is impossible; for life is the one thing that exists. All else, but
seems to us to be.'
Having said this the old man vanished.
Next morning King Esarhaddon gave orders that Lailie and all the
prisoners should be set at liberty and that the executions should cease.
On the third day he called his son Assur-bani-pal, and gave the kingdom
over into his hands; and he himself went into the desert to think over all he had
learnt. Afterwards he went about as a wanderer through the towns and villages,
preaching to the people that all life is one, and that when men wish to harm
others, they really do evil to themselves.
1903.

170

22

WORK, DEATH AND SICKNESS
A LEGEND.
THIS is a legend current among the South American Indians.
God, say they, at first made men so that they had no need to work: they
needed neither houses, nor clothes, nor food, and they all lived till they were a
hundred, and did not know what illness was.
When, after some time, God looked to see how people were living, he saw
that instead of being happy in their life, they had quarrelled with one another,
and, each caring for himself, had brought matters to such a pass that far from
enjoying life, they cursed it.
Then God said to himself: 'This comes of their living separately, each for
himself.' And to change this state of things, God so arranged matters that it
became impossible for people to live without working. To avoid suffering from
cold and hunger, they were now obliged to build dwellings, and to dig the
ground, and to grow and gather fruits and grain.
'Work will bring them together,' thought God.
'They cannot make their tools, prepare and transport their timber, build
their houses, sow and gather their harvests, spin and weave, and make their
clothes, each one alone by himself.'
'It will make them understand that the more heartily they work together,
the more they will have and the better they will live; and this will unite them.'
Time passed on, and again God came to see how men were living, and
whether they were now happy.
But he found them living worse than before. They worked together (that
they could not help doing), but not all together, being broken up into little
groups. And each group tried to snatch work from other groups, and they
hindered one another, wasting time and strength in their struggles, so that things
went ill with them all.
Having seen that this, too, was not well, God decided so as to arrange
things that man should not know the time of his death, but might die at any
moment; and he announced this to them.
'Knowing that each of them may die at any moment,' thought God, 'they
will not, by grasping at gains that may last so short a time, spoil the hours of life
allotted to them.'
But it turned out otherwise. When God returned to see how people were
living, he saw that their life was as bad as ever.
Those who were strongest, availing themselves of the fact that men might
die at any time, subdued those who were weaker, killing some and threatening
others with death. And it came about that the strongest and their descendants
did no work, and suffered from the weariness of idleness, while those who were
weaker had to work beyond their strength, and suffered from lack of rest. Each
171

set of men feared and hated the other. And the life of man became yet more
unhappy.
Having seen all this, God, to mend matters, decided to make use of one
last means; he sent all kinds of sickness among men. God thought that when all
men were exposed to sickness they would understand that those who are well
should have pity on those who are sick, and should help them, that when they
themselves fall ill those who are well might in turn help them.
And again God went away, but when He came back to see how men lived
now that they were subject to sicknesses, he saw that their life was worse even
than before. The very sickness that in God's purpose should have united men,
had divided them more than ever. Those men who were strong enough to make
others work, forced them also to wait on them in times of sickness; but they did
not, in their turn, look after others who were ill. And those who were forced to
work for others and to look after them when sick, were so worn with work that
they had no time to look after their own sick, but left them without attendance.
That the sight of sick folk might not disturb the pleasures of the wealthy, houses
were arranged in which these poor people suffered and died, far from those
whose sympathy might have cheered them, and in the arms of hired people who
nursed them without compassion, or even with disgust. Moreover, people
considered many of the illnesses infectious, and, fearing to catch them, not only
avoided the sick, but even separated themselves from those who attended the
sick.
Then God said to Himself: 'If even this means will not bring men to
understand wherein their happiness lies, let them be taught by suffering.' And
God left men to themselves.
And, left to themselves, men lived long before they understood that they
all ought to, and might be, happy. Only in the very latest times have a few of
them begun to understand that work ought not to be a bugbear to some and like
galley-slavery for others, but should be a common and happy occupation,
uniting all men. They have begun to understand that with death constantly
threatening each of us, the only reasonable business of every man is to spend the
years, months, hours, and minutes, allotted him -- in unity and love. They have
begun to understand that sickness, far from dividing men, should, on the
contrary, give opportunity for loving union with one another.
1903.

172

23

THREE QUESTIONS
IT once occurred to a certain king, that if he always knew the right time to begin
everything; if he knew who were the right people to listen to, and whom to
avoid, and, above all, if he always knew what was the most important thing to
do, he would never fail in anything he might undertake.
And this thought having occurred to him, he had it proclaimed
throughout his kingdom that he would give a great reward to any one who
would teach him what was the right time for every action, and who were the
most necessary people, and how he might know what was the most important
thing to do.
And learned men came to the King, but they all answered his questions
differently.
In reply to the first question, some said that to know the right time for
every action, one must draw up in advance, a table of days, months and years,
and must live strictly according to it. Only thus, said they, could everything be
done at its proper time. Others declared that it was impossible to decide
beforehand the right time for every action; but that, not letting oneself be
absorbed in idle pastimes, one should always attend to all that was going on, and
then do what was most needful. Others, again, said that however attentive the
King might be to what was going on, it was impossible for one man to decide
correctly the right time for every action, but that he should have a Council of
wise men, who would help him to fix the proper time for everything.
But then again others said there were some things which could not wait to
be laid before a Council, but about which one had at once to decide whether to
undertake them or not. But in order to decide that one must know beforehand
what was going to happen. It is only magicians who know that; and, therefore in
order to know the right time for every action, one must consult magicians.
Equally various were the answers to the second question. Some said, the
people the King most needed were his councillors; others, the priests; others, the
doctors; while some said the warriors were the most necessary.
To the third question, as to what was the most important occupation:
some replied that the most important thing in the world was science. Others said
it was skill in warfare; and others, again, that it was religious worship.
All the answers being different, the King agreed with none of them, and
gave the reward to none. But still wishing to find the right answers to his
questions, he decided to consult a hermit, widely renowned for his wisdom.
The hermit lived in a wood which he never quitted and he received none
but common folk. So the King put on simple clothes, and before reaching the
hermit's cell dismounted from his horse, and, leaving his bodyguard behind,
went on alone.
When the King approached, the hermit was digging the ground in front of
his hut. Seeing the King, he greeted him and went on digging. The hermit was
173

frail and weak, and each time he stuck his spade into the ground and turned a
little earth, he breathed heavily.
The King went up to him and said: 'I have come to you, wise hermit, to
ask you to answer three questions: How can I learn to do the right thing at the
right time? Who are the people I most need, and to whom should I, therefore,
pay more attention than to the rest? And, what affairs are the most important
and need my first attention?'
The hermit listened to the King, but answered nothing. He just spat on his
hand and recommenced digging.
'You are tired,' said the King, 'let me take the spade and work awhile for
you.'
'Thanks!' said the hermit, and, giving the spade to the King, he sat down
on the ground.
When he had dug two beds, the King stopped and repeated his questions.
The hermit again gave no answer, but rose, stretched out his hand for the spade,
and said:
'Now rest awhile -- and let me work a bit.'
But the King did not give him the spade, and continued to dig. One hour
passed, and another. The sun began to sink behind the trees, and the King at last
stuck the spade into the ground, and said:
'I came to you, wise man, for an answer to my questions. If you can give
me none, tell me so, and I will return home.'
'Here comes some one running,' said the hermit, 'let us see who it is.'
The King turned round, and saw a bearded man come running out of the
wood. The man held his hands pressed against his stomach, and blood was
flowing from under them. When he reached the King, he fell fainting on the
ground moaning feebly. The King and the hermit unfastened the man's clothing.
There was a large wound in his stomach. The King washed it as best he could,
and bandaged it with his handkerchief and with a towel the hermit had. But the
blood would not stop flowing, and the King again and again removed the
bandage soaked with warm blood, and washed and rebandaged the wound.
When at last the blood ceased flowing, the man revived and asked for something
to drink. The King brought fresh water and gave it to him. Meanwhile the sun
had set, and it had become cool. So the King, with the hermit's help, carried the
wounded man into the hut and laid him on the bed. Lying on the bed the man
closed his eyes and was quiet; but the King was so tired with his walk and with
the work he had done, that he crouched down on the threshold, and also fell
asleep -- so soundly that he slept all through the short summer night. When he
awoke in the morning, it was long before he could remember where he was, or
who was the strange bearded man lying on the bed and gazing intently at him
with shining eyes.
'Forgive me!' said the bearded man in a weak voice, when he saw that the
King was awake and was looking at him.
'I do not know you, and have nothing to forgive you for,' said the King.
'You do not know me, but I know you. I am that enemy of yours who
swore to revenge himself on you, because you executed his brother and seized
his property. I knew you had gone alone to see the hermit, and I resolved to kill
174

you on your way back. But the day passed and you did not return. So I came out
from my ambush to find you, and I came upon your bodyguard, and they
recognized me, and wounded me. I escaped from them, but should have bled to
death had you not dressed my wound. I wished to kill you, and you have saved
my life. Now, if I live, and if you wish it, I will serve you as your most faithful
slave, and will bid my sons do the same. Forgive me!'
The King was very glad to have made peace with his enemy so easily, and
to have gained him for a friend, and he not only forgave him, but said he would
send his servants and his own physician to attend him, and promised to restore
his property.
Having taken leave of the wounded man, the King went out into the porch
and looked around for the hermit. Before going away he wished once more to
beg an answer to the questions he had put. The hermit was outside, on his knees,
sowing seeds in the beds that had been dug the day before.
The King approached him, and said:
'For the last time, I pray you to answer my questions, wise man.'
'You have already been answered!' said the hermit still crouching on his
thin legs, and looking up at the King, who stood before him.
'How answered? What do you mean?' asked the King.
'Do you not see,' replied the hermit. 'If you had not pitied my weakness
yesterday, and had not dug these beds for me, but had gone your way, that man
would have attacked you, and you would have repented of not having stayed
with me. So the most important time was when you were digging the beds; and I
was the most important man; and to do me good was your most important
business. Afterwards, when that man ran to us, the most important time was
when you were attending to him, for if you had not bound up his wounds he
would have died without having made peace with you. So he was the most
important man, and what you did for him was your most important business.
Remember then: there is only one time that is important -- Now! It is the most
important time because it is the only time when we have any power. The most
necessary man is he with whom you are, for no man knows whether he will ever
have dealings with any one else: and the most important affair is, to do him
good, because for that purpose alone was man sent into this life!'
1903.

175

For students of English as a Foreign Language

Edgar Allan Poe:
american literary classics

s t oryt e ll e r

Edgar Allan Poe

Edgar Allan Poe:
storytelle r
p

Seven Stories
Adapted from
Edgar Allan Poe
p
A Ladder Edition at the 4,000-word level

p

Edgar Allan Poe: Storyteller
Author: Edgar Allan Poe

Second Edition: 2013
ISBN (print)

978-1-624-25060-6

ISBN (PDF)

978-1-624-25061-3

ISBN (ePub)

978-1-624-25062-0

ISBN (mobi)

978-1-624-25063-7

Adapted and published by:
Office of English Language Programs
Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs
United States Department of State
Washington, D.C.

americanenglish.state.gov

★★★
★

p

The Ladder Series of books are specially prepared editions of well-known American books. They have been
made easier to read for the enjoyment of readers for
whom English is a second language.

p

p

C O N T E N T S

The Mask of the Red Death

1

The Story of William Wilson
Part One
Part Two
Part Three
Part Four

6
10
14
18

The Fall of the House of Usher
Part One
Part Two
Part Three

22
26
30

The Black Cat

34

The Murders in the Rue Morgue
Part One
Part Two
Part Three
Part Four
Part Five
Part Six

38
42
47
51
55
60

The Tell-Tale Heart

64

The Cask of Amontillado

68

Glossary

73

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

p
The Mask of the Red Death

The Red deaTh had long been feeding on The counTRy. no
sickness had ever been so deadly — so great a killer — or so fearful to
see. Blood was its mark — the redness and the horror of blood. There
were sharp pains, and a sudden feeling that the mind was rushing in
circles inside the head. Then there was bleeding through the skin,
though it was not cut or broken — and then, death! The bright red
spots upon the body and especially upon the face of the sick man made
other men turn away from him, afraid to try to help. And the sickness
lasted, from the beginning to the end, no more than half an hour.

1

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

But Prospero, the ruler of that land, was happy and strong and
wise. When half the people of his land had died, he called to him a
thousand healthy, happy friends, and with them went far away to live
in one of his palaces. This was a large and beautiful stone building he
had planned himself. A strong, high wall circled it. This wall had gates
of iron. The gentlemen, after they had entered, brought fire to heat
the iron of the gates to make them close so firmly that nobody could
open them. Here they could forget the sickness, the Red Death. They
would leave the outside world to care for itself.
Prospero had supplied everything they needed for pleasure.
There was music, there was dancing, there was beauty, there was food
to eat and wine to drink. All these were within the wall, and within
the wall they would be safe. Outside the wall walked the Red Death.
It was near the end of their fifth month there that Prospero asked
his friends all to come together for a dancing party, a masquerade.
Everyone was asked to come dressed in fine clothes and with his eyes,
or perhaps his whole face, covered by a cloth mask.
It was a scene of great richness, that masquerade. There were
seven rooms in which Prospero’s friends danced. In many old palaces
the doors can be opened in such a way that rooms like these seven
can be seen all at the same time. In this palace it was different. Little
more than one of them could be seen at one time. There was a turn
every twenty or thirty yards. To the right and left, in the middle of
each wall, was a tall pointed window. The windows were of colored
glass, of the same color that was used in each room. The first room had
blue cloth hangings on the walls — and blue were its windows. The
second room had wall hangings of that blue-red known as purple, and
here the windows were purple. The third was green, and so was the
glass of the windows. The fourth had hangings and windows of yellow
— the fifth of white — the sixth of violet. But the seventh room had
hangings on the walls made of a rich soft cloth which was black, black
as night, and the floor, too, was covered with the same heavy black
cloth. In this room the color of the windows was not the same. It was
red — a deep blood color.
All the rooms were lighted through the outside windows. The
resulting light was strange indeed, as it colored the shapes of the
dancers. But the light that fell on the black hangings through the

2

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

blood-colored glass was the most fearful of them all. It produced so
wild a look on the faces of those who entered that there were few of
the dancers who dared to step within those dark walls.
In this room stood a great clock of black wood. Gently it marked
the seconds as they passed; and when it was time to mark the hour the
clock spoke with a loud, clear voice, a deep tone as beautiful as music,
but so strange that the music and the dancing stopped and the dancers
stood still to listen. And then, after another sixty minutes, after
another three thousand and six hundred seconds of Time, of flying
Time, the clock struck again, and the dancers stopped as before.
Nevertheless, it was a happy
and beautiful masquerade. And
you may be sure that the clothes
the dancers chose to wear, their
costumes, were strange and wonderful. The dancers looked like
the forms we might see in troubled dreams. And these — the
dreams — danced softly through
the rooms, taking the color of the
rooms as they moved. It did not
seem that their steps followed the
music, but that the music rose
from their steps. But into the seventh room the dancers do not go,
for the red light coming through
the windows, and the blackness
of the wall hangings, make them
afraid — and he who enters hears
more deeply the striking of the
great black clock.
But the other rooms are crowded, and in them beats hotly the
heart of life. And the dance goes on until at last the clock begins to
strike twelve. Again the music stopped. Again the dancers stood without moving while the slow striking sound continued. Before the clock
was quiet again, many in the crowd saw that in the first room, the blue
room, there was a masquerader who had not been seen before. As

3

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

they talked softly to each other about him a feeling of surprise spread
through all the dancers, then a feeling of fear and of sickening horror.
In such a group as this, only a very strange masquerader could
have caused such a feeling. Even among those who laugh at both life
and death, some matters cannot be laughed at. Everyone seemed now
deeply to feel that the stranger should not have been allowed to come
among them dressed in such clothes. He was tall and very thin, and
covered from head to foot like a dead man prepared for the grave. The
mask which covered his face — or was it really a mask? — the mask
which covered his face was so much like the face of a dead man that
the nearest eye could not see the difference. And yet all this might
have been acceptable — but the masquerader whom nobody knew
had made himself look like the Red Death itself! His clothes were
spotted with blood. And the mask over his face was covered with the
terrible red spots…or perhaps it was indeed his face!
When Prospero looked upon this fearful form he was first filled
with terror — and then with anger. “Who dares?” he cried. “Take him!
Seize him! Pull off his mask so that we may know who we must hang
at sunrise!”
Prospero stood in the blue room when he spoke these words. They
sounded through the seven rooms, loud and clear. At first, as he spoke,
some of the dancers started to rush toward the strange masquerader.
But they stopped, afraid, and no one dared to put out a hand to touch
him. The stranger started to walk toward the second room. He passed
within a few feet of Prospero, who stood still, surprised. And while
the dancers moved back from the center of the room, the stranger
moved quietly, without being stopped, with a slow and measured step,
through the blue room to the purple room — through the purple room
to the green room — through the green to the yellow — through this
to the white — and then to the violet room.
As the stranger was entering the seventh room, Prospero suddenly and angrily rushed through the six rooms. No one dared to
follow him. He held a sharp knife high over his head, ready to strike
the stranger. When he was within three or four feet of the strange
masquerader, the stranger turned and stood silent, looking firmly into
Prospero’s eyes. There was a cry — and the knife dropped shining
upon the black floor, upon which a minute later Prospero himself fell,

4

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

dead. The dancers then rushed into the black room. The strongest of
the men tried to hold the masquerader, whose tall form stood beside
the black clock; but when they put their hands on him they found
inside the grave-clothes no human form, no body — nothing!
Now they knew that it was the Red Death itself that had come in
the night. One by one the dancers fell, and each died as he fell. And
the fires died. And the clock stopped. And darkness and decay and
the Red Death ruled forever over all.

5

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
L

Men usually become bad by degrees. But I let all goodness fall
from me in a single moment, as if I had dropped a coat. From small
acts of darkness I passed, in one great step, into the blackest evil ever
known. Listen while I tell of the one cause that made this happen.
Death is near, and its coming has softened my spirit. I desire, in
passing through this dark valley, the understanding of other men. I
wish them to believe that I have been, in some ways, in the power of
forces beyond human control. I wish them to find for me, in the story
I am about to tell, some small fact that proves I could have done only
what I did. I would have them agree that what happened to me never
happened to other men. Is it not true that no one has ever suffered
as I do? Have I not indeed been living in a dream? And am I not now
dying from the horror and the unanswered question — the mystery of
the wildest dream ever dreamed on earth?
I am one of a family well known for their busy minds. As a small
child I showed clearly that I too had the family character. As I became
older it grew more powerful in me. For many reasons it became a cause
of talk among friends, and the hurt it did me was great. I wanted people always to do things my way; I acted like a wild fool; I let my desires
control me.
6

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

My father and mother, weak in body and mind, could do little
to hold me back. When their efforts failed, of course my will grew
stronger. From then on my voice in the house was law. At an age when
few children are allowed to be free, I was left to be guided by my own
desires. I became the master of my own actions.
I remember my first school. It was in a large house about three
hundred years old, in a small town in England, among a great number
of big trees. All of the houses there were very old. In truth, it was a
dream-like and spirit-quieting place, that old town. At this moment
I seem to feel the pleasant coolness under the shade of the trees, I
remember the sweetness of the flowers, I hear again with delight I
cannot explain the deep sound of the church bell each hour breaking
the stillness of the day.
It gives me pleasure to think about this school — as much pleasure, perhaps, as I am now able to experience. Deep in suffering as
I am — suffering only too real — perhaps no one will object if for
a short time I forget my troubles and tell a little about this period.
Moreover, the period and place are important. It was then and there
that I first saw, hanging over me, the terrible promise of things to
come. Let me remember.
The house where we boys lived and went to school was, as I have
said, old and wide. The grounds about it were large, and there was a
high wall around the outside of the whole school. Beyond this wall we
went three times in each week, on one day to take short walks in the
neighboring fields, and two times on Sunday to go to church. This
was the one church in the village, and the head-teacher of our school
was also the head of the church. With a spirit of deep wonder and of
doubt I used to watch him there! This man, with slow step and quiet,
thoughtful face, in clothes so different and shining clean — could
this be the same man who with a hard face and clothes far from clean
stood ready to strike us if we did not follow the rules of the school?
Oh, great and terrible question, beyond my small power to answer!
I well remember our playground, which was behind the house.
There were no trees, and the ground was as hard as stone. In front of
the house there was a small garden, but we stepped into this garden
only at very special times, such as when we first arrived at school, or
when we left it for the last time, or perhaps when father or mother or
a friend came to take us away for a few days.
7

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

But the house! — what a
delightful old building it was
— to me truly a palace! There
was really no end to it. I was
not always able to say certainly
which of its two floors I happened to be on. From each
room to every other there were
always three or four steps either
up or down. Then the rooms
branched into each other, and
these branches were too many
to count, and often turned and
came back upon themselves!
Our ideas about the whole great
house were not very far different
from the thoughts we had about
time without end. During the
five years I was there, I could
never have told anyone how to
find the little room where I and some eighteen or twenty other boys
slept. The schoolroom was the largest room in the house — and I
couldn’t help thinking it was the largest in the world. It was long and
low, with pointed windows and heavy wood overhead. In a far corner
was the office of our head-teacher, Mr. Bransby. This office had a thick
door, and we would rather have died than open it when he was not
there.
Inside the thick walls of this old school I passed my years from
ten to fifteen. Yet I always found it interesting. A child’s mind does
not need the outside world. In the quiet school I found more bright
pleasure than I found later, as a young man, in riches, or, as an older
man, in wrongdoing.
Yet I must have been different indeed from most boys. Few men
remember much of their early life. My early days stand out as clear
and plain as if they had been cut in gold. In truth the hotness of my
character and my desire to lead and command soon separated me
from the others. Slowly I gained control over all who were not greatly

8

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

older than myself — over all except one. This exception was a boy
who, though not of my family, had the same name as my own, William
Wilson. This boy was the only one who ever dared to say he did not
believe all I told him, and who would not follow my commands.
This troubled me greatly. I tried to make the others think that
I didn’t care. The truth was that I felt afraid of him. I had to fight to
appear equal with him, but he easily kept himself equal with me. Yet
no one else felt, as I did, that this proved him the better of the two.
Indeed, no one else saw the battle going on between us. All his
attempts to stop me in what I wanted to do were made when no one
else could see or hear us. He did not desire, as I did, to lead the other
boys. He seemed only to want to hold me back. Sometimes with wonder, and always without pleasure, I saw that his manner seemed to
show a kind of love for me. I did not feel thankful for this; I thought it
meant only that he thought himself to be very fine indeed, better than
me. Perhaps it was this love he showed for me, added to the fact that
we had the same name, and also that we had entered the school on
the same day, which made people say that we were brothers. Wilson
did not belong to my family, even very distantly. But if we had been
brothers we would have been near to each other indeed, for I learned
that we were both born on the nineteenth of January, eighteen hundred and nine. This seemed a strange and wonderful thing.

9

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Story of William Wilson
P a r t Tw o
in The fiRsT paRT of my sToRy i spoke abouT my life aT my fiRsT
school, and about the other boys — over whom I gained firm control.
But there was one boy who would not follow my commands, who
would not do what I told him to, as the other boys did. His name was
the same as mine — William Wilson — although he did not belong
to my family in any way. He seemed to feel some love for me, and had
entered the school the same day as I had. Many of the boys thought we
were brothers. I soon discovered that we had been born on the same
day: January nineteenth, eighteen hundred and nine.
Wilson continued his attempts to command me, while I continued my attempts to rule him. The strange thing is that, although I did
not like him, I could not hate him. We had a battle nearly every day,
it is true. In public it would seem that I had been proved the stronger;
but he seemed somehow able to make me feel that this was not true,
and that he himself was stronger. Nevertheless, we continued to talk
to each other in a more or less friendly way. On a number of subjects
we agreed very well. I sometimes thought that if we had met at another time and place we might have become friends.
It is not easy to explain my real feelings toward him. There was
no love, and there was no fear. Yet I saw something to honor in him,
and I wanted to learn more about him. Anyone experienced in human
nature will not need to be told that Wilson and I were always together.
This strange appearance of friendship — although we were not
friends — caused, no doubt, the strangeness of the battle between us.
I tried to make the others laugh at him; I tried to give him pain while
seeming to play a lighthearted game. My attempts were not always

10

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

successful, even though my plans were well made. There was much
about his character that simply could not be laughed at.
I could find, indeed, but one weakness. Perhaps he had been
born with it, or perhaps it had come from some illness. No one but me
would have made any use of it against him. He was able to speak only
in a very, very soft, low voice. This weakness I never failed to use in
any way that was in my power.
Wilson could fight back, and he did. There was one way he had of
troubling me beyond measure. I had never liked my name. Too many
other people had the same name; I would rather have had a name that
was not so often heard. The words sickened me. When, on the day I
arrived at the school, a second William Wilson came also, I felt angry
with him for having the name. I knew I would have to hear the name
each day a double number of times. The other William Wilson would
always be near. The other boys often thought that my actions and my
belongings were his, and his were mine.
My anger grew stronger with every happening that showed that
William Wilson and I were alike, in body or in mind. I had not then
discovered the surprising fact that we were of the same age; but I saw
that we were of the same height, and I saw that in form and in face
we were also much the same. Nothing could trouble me more deeply
(although I carefully tried to keep everyone from seeing it) than to
hear anyone say anything about the likeness between us of mind, or of
body, or of anything else. But, in truth, I had no reason to believe that
this likeness was ever noticed by our school­fellows. He saw it, and as
clearly as I; that, I knew well. He discovered that in this likeness he
could always find a way of troubling me. This proved the more than
usual sharpness of his mind.
His method, which was to increase the likeness between us,
lay both in words and in actions; and he followed his plan very well
indeed. It was easy enough to have clothes like mine. He easily learned
to walk and move as I did. His voice, of course, could not be as loud
as mine, but he made his manner of speaking the same.
How greatly this most careful picture of myself troubled me, I
will not now attempt to tell. It seemed that I was the only one who
noticed it. I was the only one who saw Wilson’s strange and knowing
smiles. Pleased with having produced in my heart the desired result,

11

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

he seemed to laugh within himself and cared nothing that no one
laughed with him.
I have already spoken of how he seemed to think he was better
and wiser than I. He would try to guide me; he would often try to stop
me from doing things I had planned. He would tell me what I should
and should not do; and he would do this not openly, but in a word or
two in which I had to look for the meaning. As I grew older I wanted
less and less to listen to him.
As it was, I could not be happy under his eyes, that always
watched me. Every day I showed more and more openly that I did
not want to listen to anything he told me. I have said that, in the first
years when we were in school together, my feelings might easily have
been turned into friendship; but in the later months, although he
talked to me less often then, I almost hated him.
Yet, let me be fair to him. I can remember no time when what he
told me was not wiser than would be expected from one of his years.
His sense of what was good or bad was sharper than my own. I might,
today, be a better and happier man if I had more often done what he
said.
It was about the same period, if I remember rightly, that by
chance he acted more openly than usual and I discovered in his manner something that deeply interested me. Somehow he brought to
mind pictures of my earliest years — I remembered, it seemed, things
I could not have remembered. These pictures were wild, half-lighted,
and not clear, but I felt that very long ago I must have known this
person standing before me. This idea, however, passed as quickly as it
had come.
It was on this same day that I had my last meeting at the school
with this other, strange William Wilson. That night, when everyone
was sleeping, I got out of bed, and with a light in my hand, I went
quietly through the house to Wilson’s room. I had long been thinking
of another of those plans to hurt him, with which I had until then had
little success. It was my purpose now to begin to act according to this
new plan.
Having reached his room, I entered without a sound, leaving the
light outside. I advanced a step, and listened. He was asleep. I turned,
took the light, and again went to the bed. I looked down upon his face.

12

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

The coldness of ice filled my whole body. My knees trembled,
my whole spirit was filled with horror. I moved the light nearer to his
face. Was this — this the face of William Wilson? I saw indeed that
it was, but I trembled as if with sickness as I imagined that it was not.
What was there in his face to trouble me so? I looked, and my mind
seemed to turn in circles in the rush of my thoughts. It was not like
this — surely not like this — that he appeared in the daytime. The
same name, the same body; the same day that we came to school! And
then there was his use of my way of walking, my manner of speaking!
Was it, in truth, humanly possible that what I now saw was the result
— and the result only — of his continued efforts to be like me? Filled
with wonder and fear, cold and trembling, I put out the light. In the
quiet darkness I went from his room and, without waiting one minute,
I left that old school and never entered it again.

13

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Story of William Wilson
Part Three
Y

It was not like this — surely not like this — that he appeared in
the daytime. The same name, the same face, the same body, the same
day of coming to school! And then his use of my way of walking, my
manner of speaking! Was it, in truth, humanly possible that what I
now saw was the result and the result only — of his continued efforts
to be like me? Afraid, I left the old school and never entered it again.
After some months at home, doing nothing, I went to study at the
famous school called Eton. I had partly forgotten my days at the other
school, or at least my feelings about those days had changed. The
truth — the terrible truth — of what had happened there was gone.
Now I doubted what I remembered. Now I called the subject into my
mind only to smile at the strength of the strange ideas and thoughts
I had once had.
My life at Eton did not change this view. The fool’s life into
which I carelessly threw myself washed away everything that was
valuable in my past. I do not wish, however, to tell here the story of my
wrongdoing — wrongdoing which went against every law of the school
and escaped the watchful eyes of all the teachers. Three years of this

14

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

had passed and I had grown much larger in body and smaller in soul.
Three years of wrongdoing had made me evil.
One night I asked a group of friends who were as evil as I to come
to a secret meeting in my room. We met at a late hour. There was
strong drink, and there were games of cards and loud talking until the
new day began appearing in the east. Warm with the wine and with
the games of chance, I was raising my glass to drink in honor of some
especially evil idea, when I heard the voice of a servant outside the
room. He said that someone had asked to speak with me in another
room.
I was delighted. A few steps brought me into the hall of the building. In this room no light was hanging. But I could see the form of a
young man about my own height, wearing clothes like those I myself
was wearing. His face I could not see. When I had entered he came
quickly up to me, and, taking me by the arm, he said softly in my ear:
“William Wilson!”
There was something in the manner of the stranger, and in the
trembling of his uplifted finger, which made my eyes open wide; but it
was not this which had so strongly touched my mind and heart. It was
the sound of those two, simple, well-known words, William Wilson,
which reached into my soul. Before I could think again and speak, he
was gone.
For some weeks I thought about this happening. Who and what
was this Wilson? — where did he come from? — and what were his
purposes? I learned that for family reasons he had suddenly left the
other school on the afternoon of the day I myself had left it. But in a
short time I stopped thinking about the subject; I gave all my thought
to plans for study at Oxford University.
There I soon went. My father and mother sent me enough money
to live like the sons of the richest families in England. Now my nature
showed itself with double force. I threw aside all honor. Among those
who spent too much money, I spent more; and I added new forms of
wrongdoing to the older ones already well-known at the university.
And I fell still lower. Although it may not be easily believed, it is
a fact that I forgot my position as a gentleman. I learned and used all
the evil ways of those men who live by playing cards. Like such skilled
gamblers, I played to make money.

15

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

My friends trusted me, however. To them I was the laughing but
honorable William Wilson, who freely gave gifts to anyone and everyone, who was young and who had some strange ideas, but who never
did anything really bad.
For two years I was successful in this way. Then a young man
came to the university, a young man named Glendinning, who, people
said, had quickly and easily become very rich. I soon found him of
weak mind. This, of course, made it easy for me to get his money by
playing cards. I played with him often.
At first, with the gambler’s usual skill, I let him take money from
me. Then my plans were ready. I met him one night in the room of
another friend, Mr. Preston. A group of eight or ten persons were
there. By my careful planning I made it seem that it was chance that
started us playing cards. In fact, it was Glendinning himself who first
spoke of a card game.
We sat and played far into the night, and at last the others
stopped playing. Glendinning and I played by ourselves, while the
others watched. The game was the one I liked best, a game called
“écarté.” Glendinning played with a wild nervous­ness that I could not
understand, though it was caused partly, I thought, by all the wine he
had been drinking. In a very short time he had lost a great amount of
money to me.
Now he wanted to double the amount for which we played. This
was as I had planned, but I made it seem that I did not want to agree.
At last I said yes. In an hour he had lost four times as much money
as before.
For some reason his face had become white. I had thought him
so rich that losing money would not trouble him, and I believed this
whiteness, this paleness, was the result of drinking too much wine.
Now, fearing what my friends might say about me, I was about to stop
the game when his broken cry and the wild look in his eyes made me
understand that he had lost everything he owned. Weak of mind and
made weaker by wine, he should never have been allowed to play that
night. But I had not stopped him; I had used his condition to destroy
him.

16

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

The room was very quiet. I could feel the icy coldness in my
friends. What I would have done I cannot say, for at that moment
the wide heavy doors of the room were suddenly opened. Every light
in the room went out, but I had seen that a man had entered; he was
about my own height, and he was wearing a very fine, long coat. The
darkness, however, was now complete, and we could only feel that
he was standing among us. Then we heard his voice. In a soft, low,
never-to-be-forgotten voice, which I felt deep in my bones, he said:
“Gentlemen, I am here only to do my duty. You cannot know the
true character of the man who has tonight taken a large amount of
money from Mr. Glendinning. Please have him take off his coat, and
then, look in it very carefully.”
While he was speaking there was not another sound in the room.
And as he ended, he was gone!

17

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Story of William Wilson
Part Four
As I ended the last part of
my story, I was speaking of that
terrible evening when I played
cards with a young gentle­­
man
called Glendinning. We were in
the room of one of my friends at
Oxford University. I had just realized that the young man, weak
of mind and weakened by wine,
had allowed me to win from him
everything he owned. I was still
trying to decide what I should do,
when, as I said…
The wide, heavy doors of
the room were suddenly opened.
Every light in the room went out;
but I had seen that a stranger had
entered; he was about my own height, and he was wearing a very fine,
long coat. The darkness, however, was now complete; and we could
only feel that he was standing among us. Then we heard him speak.
In a soft, low, and never-to-be-forgotten voice, which I felt deep in my
heart, he said: “Gentlemen, I am here only to do my duty. You cannot
know the true character of the man who has tonight taken a large
amount of money from Mr. Glendinning. Please have him take off his
coat, and then look in it very carefully.”
While he was speaking there was not another sound in the room.
As he ended, he was gone.
18

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

Can I — shall I — tell what I felt? Need I say that I was afraid,
that I felt the sick fear of those who are judged forever wrong? Many
hands held me. Lights were brought. My friends looked in my coat.
In it they found all the high cards, the valuable cards needed to win
in the game we had been playing. Secretly using these cards, I could
have taken the money of anyone who played the game with me. Mr.
Preston, in whose room we were, then said: “Mr. Wilson, this is yours.”
He lifted from the floor a fine, warm coat, and said, “We shall not
look in this to prove again what we have proved already. We have
seen enough. You will understand, I hope, the need for you to leave
the University. At the very least, you must leave my room, and leave
it now.”
Down in the dust though my spirit was, I might have tried to
strike him for those words if at that moment I had not noticed something very surprising. My coat had cost more money than most men
could spend, and it had been made especially for me. It was different,
I thought, from every other coat in the world. When, therefore, Mr.
Preston gave me the coat which he had picked up from the floor, I saw
with terror that my own was already hanging on my arm, and that the
two were alike in every way. I remembered that the strange being who
had so mysteriously entered and left the room had had a coat. No one
else in the group had been wearing one. I placed the coat offered by
Preston over my own, and left his room.
The next morning I began a hurried journey away from Oxford
University. I ran, but I could not escape. I went from city to city, and
in each one Wilson appeared. Paris, Rome, Vienna, Berlin, Moscow —
he followed me everywhere. Years passed. I went to the very ends of
the earth. I ran in fear, as if running from a terrible sickness, and still
he followed. Again and again I asked myself, “Who is he? — where
did he come from? — and what is his purpose?” But no answer was
found. And then I looked with the greatest care at the methods of his
watch over me. I learned little. It was noticeable, indeed, that when
he appeared now, it was only to stop me in those actions from which
evil might result. But what right did he have to try to control me?
I also noticed that although he always wore clothes the same as
mine, he no longer let me see his face. Did he think I would not know
him? He destroyed my honor at Oxford, he stopped me in my plans

19

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

for getting a high position in Rome, in my love in Naples, in what he
called my desire for too much money in Egypt. Did he think I could
fail to see that he was the William Wilson of my schoolboy days, the
hated and feared William Wilson? But let me hurry to the last scene
in my story.
Until now I had not tried to strike back. He was honor­able and
wise, he could be everywhere, and he knew every­thing. I felt such
wonder and fear of him that I believed myself to be weak and helpless.
Though it made me angry, I had done as he desired. But now I wanted
more and more to escape his control. As I began to grow stronger, it
seemed to me that he began to grow weaker. I felt a burning hope; in
my deepest thoughts I decided that I was going to be free.
It was at Rome, during the Carnival of 1835, that I went to a
dance in the great house of the Duke Di Broglio. I had been drinking
more wine than is usual, and the rooms seemed very crowded and hot.
I became angry as I pushed through the people. I was looking (Let me
not say why)…I was looking for the young, the laughing, the beautiful
wife of old Di Broglio. Suddenly I saw her; but as I was trying to get
through the crowd to join her, I felt a hand placed upon my shoulder,
and that ever-remembered quiet voice within my ear.
In a wild anger I took him in a strong hold. Wilson was dressed,
as I had expected, like myself, in a rich coat of blue. Around his body
was a band of red cloth from which hung a long sharp sword. A mask
of black cloth completely covered his face.
“You again!” I cried, my anger growing hotter with each word.
“Always you again! You shall not — you shall not hunt me like this
until I die! Come with me now or I will kill you where you stand.” I
pulled him after me into a small room nearby. I threw him against the
wall and closed the door. I commanded him to take his sword in his
hand. After a moment, he took it and stood waiting, ready to fight.
The fight was short indeed. I was wild with hate and anger; in
my arm I felt the strength of a thousand men. In a few moments I had
forced him back against the wall, and he was in my power. Quickly,
wildly, I put my sword’s point again and again into his heart.
At that moment I heard that someone was trying to open the
door. I hurried to close it firmly, and then turned back to my dying
enemy. But what human words can tell the surprise, the horror which

20

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

filled me at the scene I then saw?! The moment in which I had turned
to close the door had been long enough, it seemed, for a great change
to come at the far end of the room. A large mirror — a looking glass
— or so it seemed to me — now stood where it had not been before.
As I walked toward it in terror I saw my own form, all spotted with
blood, its face white, advancing to meet me with a weak and uncertain
step.
So it appeared, I say, but was not. It was my enemy — it was
Wilson, who then stood before me in the pains of death. His mask and
coat lay upon the floor. In his dress and in his face there was nothing
which was not my own!
It was Wilson; but now it was my own voice I heard, as he said:
“I have lost. Yet from now on you are also dead — dead to the World,
dead to Heaven, dead to Hope! In me you lived — and, in my death
— see by this face, which is your own, how wholly, how completely,
you have killed — your­self!”

21

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Fall of the House of Usher
Part One

It was a dark and soundless
day near the end of the year, and
clouds were hanging low in the
heavens. All day I had been riding on horseback through country with little life or beauty; and
in the early evening I came within
view of the House of Usher.
I do not know how it was
— but, with my first sight of the
building, a sense of heavy sadness
filled my spirit. I looked at the
scene before me — at the house
itself — at the ground around it
— at the cold stone walls of the
building — at its empty eye-like
windows — and at a few dead trees — I looked at this scene, I say,
with a complete sadness of soul which was no healthy, earthly feeling.
There was a coldness, a sickening of the heart, in which I could discover nothing to lighten the weight I felt. What was it, I asked myself,
what was it that was so fearful, so frightening in my view of the House
of Usher? This was a question to which I could find no answer.
I stopped my horse beside the building, on the edge of a dark and
quiet lake. There, I could see reflected in the water a clear picture
of the dead trees, and of the house and its empty eye-like windows.

22

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

I was now going to spend several weeks in this house of sadness —
this house of gloom. Its owner was named Roderick Usher. We had
been friends when we were boys; but many years had passed since our
last meeting. A letter from him had reached me, a wild letter which
demanded that I reply by coming to see him. He wrote of an illness of
the body — of a sickness of the mind — and of a desire to see me —
his best and indeed his only friend. It was the manner in which all this
was said — it was the heart in it — which did not allow me to say no.
Although as boys we had been together, I really knew little about
my friend. I knew, however, that his family, a very old one, had long
been famous for its understanding of all the arts and for many quiet
acts of kindness to the poor. I had learned too that the family had
never been a large one, with many branches. The name had passed
always from father to son, and when people spoke of the “House of
Usher,” they included both the family and the family home.
I again looked up from the picture of the house reflected in the
lake to the house itself. A strange idea grew in my mind — an idea so
strange that I tell it only to show the force of the feelings which laid
their weight on me. I really believed that around the whole house,
and the ground around it, the air itself was different. It was not the air
of heaven. It rose from the dead, decaying trees, from the gray walls,
and the quiet lake. It was a sickly, unhealthy air that I could see,
slow-moving, heavy, and gray.
Shaking off from my spirit what must have been a dream, I looked
more carefully at the building itself. The most noticeable thing about
it seemed to be its great age. None of the walls had fallen, yet the
stones appeared to be in a condi­tion of advanced decay. Perhaps the
careful eye would have discovered the beginning of a break in the
front of the build­ing, a crack making its way from the top down the
wall until it became lost in the dark waters of the lake.
I rode over a short bridge to the house. A man who worked in the
house — a servant — took my horse, and I entered. Another servant,
of quiet step, led me without a word through many dark turnings to
the room of his master. Much that I met on the way added, I do not
know how, to the strangeness of which I have already spoken. While
the objects around me — the dark wall coverings, the blackness of
the floors, and the things brought home from long forgotten wars —

23

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

while these things were like the things I had known since I was a baby
— while I admitted that all this was only what I had expected — I was
still surprised at the strange ideas which grew in my mind from these
simple things.
The room I came into was very large and high. The windows were
high, and pointed at the top, and so far above the black floor that they
were quite out of reach. Only a little light, red in color, made its way
through the glass, and served to lighten the nearer and larger objects.
My eyes, however, tried and failed to see into the far, high corners of
the room. Dark coverings hung upon the walls. The many chairs and
tables had been used for a long, long time. Books lay around the room,
but could give it no sense of life. I felt sadness hanging over everything. No escape from this deep cold gloom seemed possible.
As I entered the room, Usher stood up from where he had been
lying and met me with a warmth which at first I could not believe was
real. A look, however, at his face told me that every word he spoke
was true.
We sat down; and for some moments, while he said nothing, I
looked at him with a feeling of sad surprise. Surely, no man had ever
before changed as Roderick Usher had! Could this be the friend of my
early years? It is true that his face had always been unusual. He had
gray-white skin; eyes large and full of light; lips not bright in color,
but of a beauti­­ful shape; a well-shaped nose; hair of great softness
— a face that was not easy to forget. And now the increase in this
strangeness of his face had caused so great a change that I almost did
not know him. The horrible white of his skin, and the strange light
in his eyes, surprised me and even made me afraid. His hair had been
allowed to grow, and in its softness it did not fall around his face but
seemed to lie upon the air. I could not, even with an effort, see in my
friend the appearance of a simple human being.
In his manner, I saw at once, changes came and went; and I
soon found that this resulted from his attempt to quiet a very great
nervousness. I had indeed been prepared for some­thing like this,
partly by his letter and partly by remembering him as a boy. His actions
were first too quick and then too quiet. Sometimes his voice, slow
and trembling with fear, quickly changed to a strong, heavy, carefully
spaced, too per­fectly controlled manner. It was in this manner that he

24

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

spoke of the purpose of my visit, of his desire to see me, and of the
deep delight and strength he expected me to give him. He told me
what he believed to be the nature of his illness. It was, he said, a family
sickness, and one from which he could not hope to grow better — but
it was, he added at once, only a nervous illness which would without
doubt soon pass away. It showed itself in a number of strange feelings.
Some of these, as he told me of them, interested me but were beyond
my understanding; perhaps the way in which he told me of them
added to their strangeness. He suffered much from a sickly increase in
the feeling of all the senses; he could eat only the most tasteless food;
all flowers smelled too strongly for his nose; his eyes were hurt by even
a little light; and there were few sounds which did not fill him with
horror. A certain kind of sick fear was completely his master.
“I shall die,” he said. “I shall die! I must die of this fool’s sickness.
In this way, this way and no other way, I shall be lost. I fear what will
happen in the future, not for what happens, but for the result of what
happens. I have, indeed, no fear of pain, but only fear of its result —
of terror! I feel that the time will soon arrive when I must lose my
life, and my mind, and my soul, together, in some last battle with that
horrible enemy: fear!”

25

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Fall of the House of Usher
P a r t Tw o

Roderick Usher, whom I had
known as a boy, was now ill
and had asked me to come to
help him. When I arrived I felt
something strange and fearful
about the great old stone house,
about the lake in front of it, and
about Usher himself. He appeared
not like a human being, but like
a spirit that had come back from
beyond the grave. It was an
illness, he said, from which he
would surely die. He called his
sickness fear. “I have,” he said,
“no fear of pain, but only the fear
of its re­
sult — of terror. I feel
that the time will soon arrive when I must lose my life, and my mind,
and my soul, together, in some last battle with that horrible enemy:
fear!”
I learned also, but slowly, and through broken words with doubtful meaning, another strange fact about the condi­tion of Usher’s mind.
He had certain sick fears about the house in which he lived, and he
had not stepped out of it for many years. He felt that the house, with
its gray walls and the quiet lake around it, had somehow through the
long years gotten a strong hold on his spirit.

26

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

He said, however, that much of the gloom which lay so heavily on
him was probably caused by something more plainly to be seen — by
the long-continued illness — indeed, the coming death — of a dearly
loved sister — his only com­pany for many years. Except for himself,
she was the last member of his family on earth. “When she dies,” he
said, with a sadness which I can never forget, “when she dies, I will be
the last of the old, old family — the House of Usher.”
While he spoke, the lady Madeline (for so she was called) passed
slowly through a distant part of the room, and without seeing that I
was there, went on. I looked at her with a complete and wondering
surprise and with some fear — and yet I found I could not explain to
myself such feelings. My eyes followed her. When she came to a door
and it closed behind her, my eyes turned to the face of her brother
— but he had put his face in his hands, and I could see only that the
thin fingers through which his tears were flowing were whiter than
ever before.
The illness of the lady Madeline had long been beyond the help
of her doctors. She seemed to care about nothing. Slowly her body had
grown thin and weak, and often for a short period she would fall into
a sleep like the sleep of the dead. So far she had not been forced to
stay in bed; but by the evening of the day I arrived at the house, the
power of her destroyer (as her brother told me that night) was too
strong for her. I learned that my one sight of her would probably be
the last I would have — that the lady, at least while living, would be
seen by me no more.
For several days following, her name was not spoken by either
Usher or myself; and during this period I was busy with efforts to lift
my friend out of his sadness and gloom. We painted and read together;
or listened, as if in a dream, to the wild music he played. And so, as a
warmer and more loving friendship grew between us, I saw more clearly the uselessness of all attempts to bring happiness to a mind from
which only darkness came, spreading upon all objects in the world its
never-ending gloom.
I shall always remember the hours I spent with the master of the
House of Usher. Yet I would fail in any attempt to give an idea of the
true character of the things we did together. There was a strange light
over everything. The paint­ings which he made made me tremble,

27

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

though I know not why. To tell of them is beyond the power of written
words. If ever a man painted an idea, that man was Roderick Usher.
For me at least there came out of his pictures a sense of fear and
wonder.
One of these pictures may be told, although weakly, in words.
It showed the inside of a room where the dead might be placed, with
low walls, white and plain. It seemed to be very deep under the earth.
There was no door, no window; and no light or fire burned; yet a river
of light flowed through it, filling it with a horrible, ghastly brightness.
I have spoken of that sickly condition of the senses, which made
most music painful for Usher to hear. The notes he could listen to
with pleasure were very few. It was this fact, perhaps, that made the
music he played so different from most music. But the wild beauty of
his playing could not be explained.
The words of one of his songs, called “The Haunted Palace,” I
have easily remembered. In it I thought I saw, and for the first time,
that Usher knew very well that his mind was weakening. This song
told of a great house where a king lived — a palace — in a green
valley, where all was light and color and beauty, and the air was sweet.
In the palace were two bright windows through which people in that
happy valley could hear music and could see smiling ghosts — spirits
— moving around the king. The palace door was of the richest materials, in red and white; through it came other spirits whose only duty
was to sing in their beautiful voices about how wise their king was.
But a dark change came, the song continued, and now those who
enter the valley see through the windows, in a red light, shapes that
move to broken music; while through the door, now colorless, a ghastly river of ghosts, laughing but no longer smiling, rushes out forever.
Our talk of this song led to another strange idea in Usher’s mind.
He believed that plants could feel and think, and not only plants, but
rocks and water as well. He believed that the gray stones of his house,
and the small plants growing on the stones, and the decaying trees,
had a power over him that made him what he was.
Our books — the books which, for years, had fed the sick man’s
mind — were, as might be supposed, of this same wild character.
Some of these books Usher sat and studied for hours. His chief delight
was found in reading one very old book, written for some forgotten
church, telling of the Watch over the Dead.
28

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

At last, one evening he told me that the lady Madeline was alive
no more. He said he was going to keep her body for a time in one of
the many vaults inside the walls of the build­ing. The worldly reason
he gave for this was one with which I felt I had to agree. He had
decided to do this because of the nature of her illness, because of the
strange interest and ques­tions of her doctors, and because of the great
distance to the graveyard where members of his family were placed
in the earth.
We two carried her body to its resting place. The vault in which
we placed it was small and dark, and in ages past it must have seen
strange and bloody scenes. It lay deep below that part of the building
where I myself slept. The thick door was of iron, and because of its
great weight made a loud, hard sound when it was opened and closed.
As we placed the lady Madeline in this room of horror I saw for
the first time the great likeness between brother and sister, and Usher
told me then that they were twins — they had been born on the same
day. For that reason the understanding between them had always been
great, and the tie that held them together very strong.
We looked down at the dead face one last time, and I was filled
with wonder. As she lay there, the lady Madeline looked not dead but
asleep — still soft and warm — though to the touch cold as the stones
around us.

29

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Fall of the House of Usher
Part Three

I was visiting an old friend
of mine, Roderick Usher, in his
old stone house, his palace, where
a feeling of death hung on the air.
I saw how fear was pressing on his
heart and mind. Now his only sister, the lady Madeline, had died
and we had put her body in its
resting place, in a room inside the
cold walls of the palace, a damp,
dark vault, a fearful place. As we
looked down upon her face, I saw
that there was a strong likeness
between the two. “Indeed,” said
Usher, “we were born on the same
day, and the tie between us has
always been strong.”
We did not long look down at her, for fear and wonder filled our
hearts. There was still a little color in her face and there seemed to be
a smile on her lips. We closed the heavy iron door and returned to the
rooms above, which were hardly less gloomy than the vault.
And now a change came in the sickness of my friend’s mind. He
went from room to room with a hurried step. His face was, if possible,
whiter and more ghastly than before, and the light in his eyes had

30

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

gone. The trembling in his voice seemed to show the greatest fear.
At times he sat looking at nothing for hours, as if listening to some
sound I could not hear. I felt his condition, slowly but certainly, gaining power over me; I felt that his wild ideas were becoming fixed in
my own mind.
As I was going to bed late in the night of the seventh or eighth
day after we placed the lady Madeline within the vault, I experienced
the full power of such feelings. Sleep did not come — while the hours
passed. My mind fought against the nervousness. I tried to believe
that much, if not all, of what I felt was due to the gloomy room, to the
dark wall coverings, which in a rising wind moved on the walls. But
my efforts were useless. A trembling I could not stop filled my body,
and fear without reason caught my heart. I sat up, looking into the
darkness of my room, listening — I do not know why — to certain low
sounds which came when the storm was quiet. A feeling of horror lay
upon me like a heavy weight. I put on my clothes and began walking
nervously around the room.
I had been walking for a very short time when I heard a light step
coming toward my door. I knew it was Usher. In a moment I saw him
at my door, as usual very white, but there was a wild laugh in his eyes.
Even so, I was glad to have his company. “And have you not seen it?”
he said. He hurried to one of the windows and opened it to the storm.
The force of the entering wind nearly lifted us from our feet. It
was, indeed, a stormy but beautiful night, and wildly strange. The
heavy, low-hanging clouds which seemed to press down upon the
house, flew from all directions against each other, always returning
and never passing away in the distance. With their great thickness
they cut off all light from the moon and the stars. But we could see
them because they were lighted from below by the air itself, which we
could see, rising from the dark lake and from the stones of the house
itself.
“You must not — you shall not look out at this!” I said to Usher,
as I led him from the window to a seat. “This appearance which surprises you so has been seen in other places, too. Perhaps the lake is
the cause. Let us close this window; the air is cold. Here is one of the
stories you like best. I will read and you shall listen and thus we will
live through this fearful night together.”

31

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

The old book which I had picked up was one written by a fool
for fools to read, and it was not, in truth, one that Usher liked. It was,
however, the only one within easy reach. He seemed to listen quietly.
Then I came to a part of the story in which a man, a strong man full
of wine, begins to break down a door, and the sound of the dry wood
as it breaks can be heard through all the forest around him.
Here I stopped, for it seemed to me that from some very distant
part of the house sounds came to my ears like those of which I had
been reading. It must have been this likeness that had made me notice
them, for the sounds themselves, with the storm still increasing, were
nothing to stop or interest me.
I continued the story, and read how the man, now entering
through the broken door, discovers a strange and terrible animal of
the kind so often found in these old stories. He strikes it and it falls,
with such a cry that he has to close his ears with his hands. Here again
I stopped.
There could be no doubt. This time I did hear a distant sound,
very much like the cry of the animal in the story. I tried to control
myself so that my friend would see nothing of what I felt. I was not
certain that he had heard the sound, although he had clearly changed
in some way. He had slowly moved his chair so that I could not see
him well. I did see that his lips were moving as if he were speaking to
himself. His head had dropped forward, but I knew he was not asleep,
for his eyes were open and he was moving his body from side to side.
I began reading again, and quickly came to a part of the story
where a heavy piece of iron falls on a stone floor with a ringing sound.
These words had just passed my lips when I heard clearly, but from far
away, a loud ringing sound — as if something of iron had indeed fallen
heavily upon a stone floor, or as if an iron door had closed.
I lost control of myself completely, and jumped up from my chair.
Usher still sat, moving a little from side to side. His eyes were turned
to the floor. I rushed to his chair. As I placed my hand on his shoulder,
I felt that his whole body was trembling; a sickly smile touched his
lips; he spoke in a low, quick, and nervous voice as if he did not know
I was there.

32

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

“Yes!” he said. “I heard it! Many minutes, many hours, many days
have I heard it — but I did not dare to speak! We have put her living
in the vault! Did I not say that my senses were too strong? I heard her
first movements many days ago — yet I did not dare to speak! And
now, that story — but the sounds were hers! Oh, where shall I run?!
She is coming — coming to ask why I put her there too soon. I hear
her footsteps on the stairs. I hear the heavy beating of her heart.”
Here he jumped up and cried as if he were giving up his soul: “i tell
you, she now stands at the door!!”
The great door to which he was pointing now slowly opened. It
was the work of the rushing wind, perhaps — but no — outside that
door a shape did stand, the tall figure, in its grave-clothes, of the lady
Madeline of Usher. There was blood upon her white dress, and the
signs of her terrible efforts to escape were upon every part of her thin
form. For a moment she remained trembling at the door; then, with a
low cry, she fell heavily in upon her brother; in her pain, as she died
at last, she carried him down with her, down to the floor. He too was
dead, killed by his own fear.
I rushed from the room; I rushed from the house. I ran. The storm
was around me in all its strength as I crossed the bridge. Suddenly
a wild light moved along the ground at my feet, and I turned to see
where it could have come from, for only the great house and its darkness were behind me. The light was that of the full moon, of a bloodred moon, which was now shining through that break in the front
wall, that crack which I thought I had seen when I first saw the palace.
Then only a little crack, it now widened as I watched. A strong wind
came rushing over me — the whole face of the moon appeared. I saw
the great walls falling apart. There was a long and stormy shouting
sound — and the deep black lake closed darkly over all that remained
of the house of usher.

33

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Black Cat

Tomorrow I die. Tomorrow I
die, and today I want to tell the
world what happened and thus
perhaps free my soul from the
horrible weight which lies upon
it.
But listen! Listen, and
you shall hear how I have been
destroyed.
When I was a child I had a
natural goodness of soul which
led me to love animals — all
kinds of animals, but espe­
cially
those animals we call pets, animals which have learned to live
with men and share their homes
with them. There is some­thing in the love of these animals which
speaks directly to the heart of the man who has learned from experience how uncer­tain and changeable is the love of other men.
I was quite young when I married. You will understand the joy I
felt to find that my wife shared with me my love for animals. Quickly
she got for us several pets of the most like­able kind. We had birds,
some goldfish, a fine dog, and a cat.
The cat was a beautiful animal, of unusually large size, and
entirely black. I named the cat Pluto, and it was the pet I liked best.

34

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

I alone fed it, and it followed me all around the house. It was even
with difficulty that I stopped it from fol­lowing me through the streets.
Our friendship lasted, in this manner, for several years, during
which, however, my own character became greatly changed. I began
to drink too much wine and other strong drinks. As the days passed
I became less loving in my manner; I became quick to anger; I forgot
how to smile and laugh. My wife — yes, and my pets, too, all except
the cat — were made to feel the change in my character.
One night I came home quite late from the inn, where I now
spent more and more time drinking. Walking with uncer­tain step,
I made my way with effort into the house. As I entered I saw — or
thought I saw — that Pluto, the cat, was trying to stay out of my way,
to avoid me. This action, by an animal which I had thought still loved
me, made me angry beyond reason. My soul seemed to fly from my
body. I took a small knife out of my coat and opened it. Then I took
the poor animal by the neck and with one quick movement I cut out
one of its fear-filled eyes!
Slowly the cat got well. The hole where its eye had been was not
a pretty thing to look at, it is true; but the cat no longer appeared to
suffer any pain. As might be expected, however, it ran from me in fear
whenever I came near. Why should it not run? Yet this did not fail
to anger me. I felt growing inside myself a new feeling. Who has not,
a hundred times, found himself doing wrong, doing some evil thing
for no other reason than because he knows he should not? Are not
we humans at all times pushed, ever driven in some unknown way to
break the law just because we understand it to be the law?
One day, in cold blood, I tied a strong rope around the cat’s neck,
and taking it down into the cellar under the house I hung it from one
of the wood beams above my head. I hung it there until it was dead.
I hung it there with tears in my eyes, I hung it because I knew it had
loved me, because I felt it had given me no reason to hurt it, because
I knew that my doing so was a wrong so great, a sin so deadly that it
would place my soul forever outside the reach of the love of God!
That same night, as I lay sleeping, I heard through my open window the cries of our neighbors. I jumped from my bed and found that
the entire house was filled with fire. It was only with great difficulty
that my wife and I escaped. And when we were out of the house, all we

35

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

could do was stand and watch it burn to the ground. I thought of the
cat as I watched it burn, the cat whose dead body I had left hanging in
the cellar. It seemed almost that the cat had in some mysterious way
caused the house to burn so that it could make me pay for my evil act,
so that it could take revenge upon me.
Months went by, and I could not drive the thought of the cat out
of my mind. One night I sat in the inn, drinking, as usual. In the corner I saw a dark object that I had not seen before. I went over to see
what it could be. It was a cat, a cat almost exactly like Pluto. I touched
it with my hand and petted it, passing my hand softly along its back.
The cat rose and pushed its back against my hand.
Suddenly I realized that I wanted the cat. I offered to buy it from
the innkeeper, but he claimed he had never seen the animal before.
As I left the inn, it followed me, and I allowed it to do so. It soon
became a pet of both my wife and myself.
The morning after I
brought it home, however, I dis­
covered that this cat, like Pluto,
had only one eye. How was it
possible that I had not noticed
this the night before? This fact
only made my wife love the
cat more. But I, myself, found
a feeling of dislike growing in
me. My growing dislike of the
animal only seemed to increase
its love for me. It followed
me, followed me everywhere,
always. When I sat, it lay down
under my chair. When I stood
up it got between my feet and
nearly made me fall. Wherever
I went, it was always there. At
night I dreamed of it. And I
began to hate that cat!
One day my wife called to
me from the cellar of the old

36

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

building where we were now forced to live. As I went down the stairs,
the cat, following me as always, ran under my feet and nearly threw
me down.
In sudden anger, I took a knife and struck wildly at the cat.
Quickly my wife put out her hand and stopped my arm. This only
increased my anger and, without thinking, I turned and put the knife’s
point deep into her heart! She fell to the floor and died without a
sound.
I spent a few moments looking for the cat, but it was gone. And I
had other things to do, for I knew I must do something with the body,
and quickly. Suddenly I noted a place in the wall of the cellar where
stones had been added to the wall to cover an old fireplace which
was no longer wanted. The walls were not very strongly built, and I
found I could easily take down those stones. Behind them there was,
as I knew there must be, a hole just big enough to hold the body. With
much effort I put the body in and carefully put the stones back in their
place. I was pleased to see that it was quite impossible for anyone to
know that a single stone had been moved.
Days passed. Still there was no cat. A few people came and asked
about my wife; but I answered them easily. Then one day several officers of the police came. Certain that they could find nothing, I asked
them in and went with them as they searched.
Finally they searched the cellar from end to end. I watched them
quietly, and, as I expected, they noticed nothing. But as they started
up the stairs again, I felt myself driven by some unknown inner force
to let them know, to make them know, that I had won the battle.
“The walls of this building,” I said, “are very strongly built; it is a
fine old house.” And as I spoke I struck with my stick that very place
in the wall behind which was the body of my wife. Immediately I felt a
cold feeling up and down my back as we heard coming out of the wall
itself a horrible cry.
For one short moment the officers stood looking at each other.
Then quickly they began to pick at the stones, and in a short time
they saw before them the body of my wife, black with dried blood and
smelling of decay. On the body’s head, its one eye filled with fire, its
wide open mouth the color of blood, sat the cat, crying out its revenge!

37

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Murders in the Rue Morgue
Part One

Paris! In Paris it was, in the
summer of 1840. There I first
met that strange and interesting
young fellow, August Dupin.
Dupin was the last member
of a well-known family, a family which had once been rich
and famous; he himself, however,
was far from rich. He cared little
about money. He had enough to
buy the most necessary things of
life — and a few books; he did
not trouble himself about the
rest. Just books. With books he
was happy.
We first met when we were both trying to find the same book.
As it was a book which few had ever heard of, this chance brought us
together in an old bookstore. Later we met again in the same store.
Then again in another bookstore. Soon we began to talk.
I was deeply interested in the family history he told me. I was surprised, too, at how much and how widely he had read; more important, the force of his busy mind was like a bright light in my soul. I
felt that the friendship of such a man would be for me riches without
price. I therefore told him of my feelings toward him, and he agreed to

38

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

come and live with me. He would have, I thought, the joy of using my
many fine books. And I would have the pleasure of having someone
with me, for I was not happy alone.
We passed the days reading, writing and talking. But Dupin was a
lover of the night, and at night, often with only the light of the stars
to show us the way, we walked the streets of Paris, sometimes talking,
sometimes quiet, always thinking.
I soon noticed a special reasoning power he had, an unusual
reasoning power. Using it gave him great pleasure. He told me once,
with a soft and quiet laugh, that most men have windows over their
hearts; through these he could see into their souls. Then, he surprised
me by telling what he knew about my own soul; and I found that he
knew things about me that I had thought only I could possibly know.
His manner at these moments was cold and distant. His eyes looked
empty and far away, and his voice became high and nervous. At such
times it seemed to me that I saw not just Dupin, but two Dupins —
one who coldly put things together, and another who just as coldly
took them apart.
One night we were walking down one of Paris’s long and dirty
streets. Both of us were busy with our thoughts. Neither had spoken
for perhaps fifteen minutes. It seemed as if we had each forgotten that
the other was there, at his side. I soon learned that Dupin had not
forgotten me, however. Suddenly he said:
“You’re right. He is a very little fellow, that’s true, and he would
be more successful if he acted in lighter, less serious plays.”
“Yes, there can be no doubt of that!” I said.
At first I saw nothing strange in this. Dupin had agreed with me,
with my own thoughts. This, of course, seemed to me quite natural.
For a few seconds I continued walking, and thinking; but suddenly
I realized that Dupin had agreed with something which was only a
thought. I had not spoken a single word. I stopped walking and turned
to my friend. “Dupin,” I said, “Dupin, this is beyond my understanding. How could you know that I was thinking of….” Here I stopped, in
order to test him, to learn if he really did know my unspoken thoughts.
“How did I know you were thinking of Chantilly? Why do you
stop? You were thinking that Chantilly is too small for the plays in
which he acts.”

39

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

“That is indeed what I was thinking. But, tell me, in Heaven’s
name, the method — if method there is — by which you have been
able to see into my soul in this matter.”
“It was the fruit-seller.”
“Fruit-seller!? I know no fruit-seller.”
“I mean the man who ran into you as we entered this street — it
may have been ten or fifteen minutes ago, perhaps less.”
“Yes; yes, that’s true, I remember now. A fruit-seller, carrying a
large basket of apples on his head, almost threw me down. But I don’t
understand why the fruit-seller should make me think of Chantilly —
or, if he did, how you can know that.”
“I will explain. Listen closely now:
“Let us follow your thoughts from the fruit-seller to the play-actor, Chantilly. Those thoughts must have gone like this: from the
fruit-seller to the cobblestones, from the cobblestones to stereotomy,
and from stereotomy to Epicurus, to Orion, and then to Chantilly.
“As we turned into this street the fruit-seller, walking very quickly past us, ran against you and made you step on some cobblestones
which had not been put down evenly, and I could see that the stones
had hurt your foot. You spoke a few angry words to yourself, and continued walking. But you kept looking down, down at the cobblestones
in the street, so I knew you were still thinking of stones.
“Then we came to a small street where they are putting down
street stones which they have cut in a new and very special way. Here
your face became brighter and I saw your lips move. I could not doubt
that you were saying the word stereotomy, the name for this new way
of cutting stones. It is a strange word, isn’t it? But you will remember
that we read about it in the newspaper only yesterday. I thought that
the word stereotomy must make you think of that old Greek writer
named Epicurus, who wrote of something he called atoms; he believed
that the world and everything in the heavens above are made of these
atoms.
“Not long ago you and I were talking about Epicurus and his
ideas, his atoms, ideas which Epicurus wrote about more than 2,000
years ago. We were talking about how much those old ideas are like
today’s ideas about the earth and the stars and the sky. I felt sure that
you would look up to the sky. You did look up. Now I was certain that

40

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

I had been following your thoughts as they had in fact come into your
mind. I too looked up, and saw that the group of stars we call Orion is
very bright and clear tonight. I knew you would notice this, and think
about the name Orion.
“Now follow my thoughts carefully. Only yesterday, in the newspaper, there was an article about the actor Chantilly, an article which
was not friendly to Chantilly, not friendly at all. We noticed that the
writer of the article had used some words taken from a book we both
had read. These words were about Orion. So I knew you would put
together the two ideas of Orion and Chantilly. I saw you smile, remembering that article and the hard words in it.
“Then I saw you stand straighter, as tall as you could make yourself. I was sure you were thinking of Chantilly’s size, and especially his
height. He is small; he is short. And so I spoke, saying that he is indeed
a very little fellow, this Chantilly, and he would be more successful if
he acted in lighter, less serious plays.”
I will not say that I was surprised. I was more than surprised; I
was astonished. Dupin was right, as right as he could be. Those were
in fact my thoughts, my unspoken thoughts, as my mind moved from
one thought to the next. But if I was astonished by this, I would soon
be more than astonished.
One morning this strangely interesting man showed me once
again his unusual reasoning power. We heard that an old woman had
been killed by unknown persons. The killer, or the killers, had cut
her head off — and escaped into the night. Who was this killer, this
murderer? The police had no answer. They had looked everywhere
and found nothing that helped them. They did not know what to do
next. And so — they did nothing.
But not Dupin. He knew what to do.

41

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Murders in the Rue Morgue
P a r t Tw o

It was in Paris in the summer
of 1840 that I met August Dupin.
He was an unusually interesting
young man with a busy, forceful
mind. This mind could, it seemed,
look right through a man’s body
into his soul, and uncover his
deepest thoughts. Sometimes he
seemed to be not one, but two
people — one who coldly put
things together, and another who
just as coldly took them apart.
One morning, in the heat of
the summer, Dupin showed me once again his special reasoning power.
We read in the newspaper about a terrible killing. An old woman and
her daughter, living alone in an old house in the Rue Morgue, had
been killed in the middle of the night:
Paris, July 7, 1840. In the early morning today the people in the
western part of the city were awakened from their sleep by cries of
terror, which came, it seemed, from a house in the street called the
Rue Morgue. The only persons living in the house were an old woman,
Mrs. L’Espanaye, and her daughter. Several neighbors and a policeman ran toward the house, but by the time they reached it the cries had
stopped. When no one answered their calls, they forced the door open.

42

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

As they rushed in they heard voices, two voices; they seemed to come
from above. The group hurried from room to room, but they found
nothing until they reached the fourth floor. There they found a door
that was firmly closed, locked, with the key inside. Quick­ly they forced
the door open, and they saw spread be­fore them a bloody sickening
scene — a scene of horror!
The room was in the wildest possible order — broken chairs and tables
were lying all around the room. There was only one bed, and from it
everything had been taken and thrown into the middle of the floor.
There was blood everywhere, on the floor, on the bed, on the walls. A
sharp knife covered with blood was lying on the floor. In front of the
fireplace there was some long gray hair, also bloody; it seemed to have
been pulled from a human head. On the floor were four pieces of gold,
an earring, several objects made of silver, and two bags containing a
large amount of money in gold. Clothes had been thrown around the
room. A box was found under the bed covers. It was open, and held
only a few old letters and papers.
There was no one there — or so it seemed. Above the fireplace they
found the dead body of the daughter; it had been put up into the
opening where the smoke escapes to the sky. The body was still warm.
There was blood on the face, and on the neck there were dark, deep
marks which seemed to have been made by strong fingers. These marks
surely show how the daughter was killed.
After hunting in every part of the house without finding anything
more, the group went outside. Behind the building they found the body
of the old woman. Her neck was almost cut through, and when they
tried to lift her up, her head fell off.
The next day the newspaper offered to its readers these new facts:
The Murders in the Rue Morgue. —Paris, July 8, 1840. The police
have talked with many people about the terrible killings in the old
house on the Rue Morgue but nothing has been learned to answer the
question of who the killers were.

43

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

Pauline Dubourg, a washwoman, says she has known both of the
dead women for more than three years, and has washed their clothes
during that period. The old lady and her daughter seemed to love each
other dearly. They always paid her well. She did not know where their
money came from, she said. She never met anyone in the house. Only
the two women lived on the fourth floor.
Pierre Moreau, a shopkeeper, says Mrs. L’Espanaye had bought food
at his shop for nearly four years. She owned the house and had lived
in it for more than six years. People said they had money. He never
saw anyone enter the door except the old lady and her daughter, and
a doctor eight or ten times, perhaps.
Many other persons, neighbors, said the same thing. Almost no one
ever went into the house and Mrs. L’Espanaye and her daughter were
not often seen.
Jules Mignaud, a banker, says that Mrs. L’Espanaye had put money in
his bank, beginning eight years before. Three days before her death she
took out of the bank a large amount of money, in gold. A man from
the bank carried it for her to her house.
Isidore Muset, a policeman, says that he was with the group that first
entered the house. While he was going up the stairs he heard two voices, one low and soft, and one hard, high, and very strange — the voice
of someone who was certainly not French, the voice of a foreigner.
Spanish perhaps. It was not a woman’s voice. He could not understand
what it said. But the low voice, the softer voice, said, in French, “My
God!”
Alfonso Garcia, who is Spanish and lives on the Rue Morgue, says he
entered the house but did not go up the stairs; he is nervous and he was
afraid he might be ill. He heard the voices. He believes the high voice
was not that of a Frenchman. Perhaps it was English; but he doesn’t
understand English, so he is not sure.

44

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

William Bird, another foreigner, an Englishman, says he was one of
the persons who entered the house. He has lived in Paris for two years.
He heard the voices. The low voice was that of a Frenchman, he was
sure, because he heard it say, in French, “My God!” The high voice
was very loud. He is sure it was not the voice of an Englishman, nor
the voice of a Frenchman. It seemed to be that of an Italian. It might
have been a woman’s voice. He does not understand Italian.
Mr. Alberto Montani, an Italian, was passing the house at the time
of the cries. He says that they lasted for about two minutes. They
were screams, long and loud, terrible, fearful sounds. Montani, who
speaks Spanish but not French, says that he also heard two voices. He
thought both voices were French. But he could not understand any of
the words spoken.
The persons who first entered the house all agree that the door of the
room where the daughter’s body was found was locked on the inside.
When they reached the door everything was quiet. When they forced
the door open they saw no one. The windows were closed and firmly
locked on the inside. There are no steps that someone could have gone
down while they were going up. They say that the openings over the
fireplace are too small for anyone to have escaped through them. It
took four or five people to pull the daughter’s body out of the opening over the fireplace. A careful search was made through the whole
house. It was four or five minutes from the time they heard the voices
to the moment they forced open the door of the room.
Paul Dumas, a doctor, says that he was called to see the bodies soon
after they were found. They were in a horrible condition, badly marked
and broken. Such results could not have come from a woman’s hands,
only from those of a very powerful man. The daughter had been killed
by strong hands around her neck.
The police have learned nothing more than this. A killing as strange as
this has never before happened in Paris. The police do not know where
to begin to look for the answer.

45

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

When we had finished reading the newspaper’s account of the
murders neither Dupin nor myself said anything for a while. But I
could see in his eyes that cold, empty look which told me that his
mind was working busily. When he asked me what I thought of all
this, I could only agree with all Paris. I told him I considered it a very
difficult problem — a mystery, to which it was not possible to find an
answer. No, no, said Dupin.
“No, I think you are wrong. A mystery it is, yes. But there must
be an answer. Let us go to the house and see what we can see. There
must be an answer. There must!”

46

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

p
The Murders in the Rue Morgue
Part Three

It was in Paris that I met
August Dupin. He was an un­­usually
interesting young man with a busy,
forceful mind. This mind could, it
seemed, look right through a man’s
body into his deepest soul.
One hot summer morning we
read in the newspapers about a
terrible killing. The dead persons
were an old woman and her unmarried daughter, who lived alone on
the fourth floor of an old house on
the street called the Rue Morgue.
Someone had taken the
daughter’s neck in his
powerful fingers and
pressed with fearful strength until her life was gone. Her mother’s
body was found outside, behind the house, with the head nearly cut
off. The knife with which she was killed was found, however, in the
room, on the floor.
Several neighbors ran to the house when they heard the women’s
cries of fear. As they ran up to the fourth floor they heard two other
voices. But when they reached the room and broke down the door
they found no living person in the room. Like the door, the two

47

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

windows were firmly closed, locked on the inside. There was no other
way that the killer could have got in or out of the room.
The Paris police did not know where to begin to look for the
answer. I told Dupin that it seemed to me that it was not possible to
learn the answer to the mystery of these killings. No, no, said Dupin.
“No; I think you are wrong. A mystery it is, yes. But there must
be an answer. We must not judge what is possible just by what we have
read in the newspapers. The Paris police work hard and often get good
results; but there is no real method in what they do. When something
more than simple hard work is needed, when a little real method is
needed, the police fail. Sometimes they stand too near the problem.
Often, if a person looks at something very closely he can see a few
things more clearly, but the shape of the whole thing escapes him.
“There must be an answer! There must! Let us go to the house
and see what we can see. I know the head of the police, and he will
allow us to do so. And this will be interesting and give us some pleasure.”
I thought it strange that Dupin should believe we would get pleasure out of this. But I said nothing.
It was late in the afternoon when we reached the house on the
Rue Morgue. It was easily found for there were still many persons — in
fact, a crowd, standing there looking at it. Before going in we walked
all around it, and Dupin carefully looked at the neighboring houses as
well as this one. I could not understand the reason for such great care.
We came again to the front of the house and went in. We went
up the stairs into the room where the daughter’s body had been
found. Both bodies were there. The police had left the room as they
had found it. I saw nothing beyond what the newspaper had told us.
Dupin looked with great care at every­thing, at the bodies, the walls,
the fireplace, the windows. Then we went home.
Dupin said nothing. I could see the cold look in his eyes which
told me that his mind was working, working busily, quickly. I asked no
questions.
Dupin said nothing until the next morning, when he came into
my room and asked me suddenly if I had not no­­ticed something especially strange about what we saw at the house on the Rue Morgue. I
replied: “Nothing more than we both read in the newspaper.”

48

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

“Tell me, my friend. How shall we explain the horrible force, the
unusual strength used in these murders? And whose were the voices
that were heard? No one was found except the dead women; yet there
was no way for anyone to escape. And the wild condition of the room;
the body which was found head down above the fireplace; the terrible
broken appearance of the body of the old lady, with its head cut off;
these are all so far from what might be expected that the police are
standing still; they don’t know where to begin.
“These things are unusual, indeed; but they are not deep
mysteries. We should not ask, ‘What has happened?’ but ‘What has
happened that has never happened before?’ In fact, the very things
that the police think cannot possibly be ex­plained are the things
which will lead me to the answer. In­­deed, I believe they have already
led me to the answer.”
I was so surprised I could not say a word. Dupin looked quickly
at the door. “I am now waiting for a person who will know something
about these murders, these wild killings. I do not think he did them
himself. But I think he will know the killer. I hope I am right about
this. If I am, then I expect to find the whole answer, today. I expect
the man here — in this room — at any moment. It is true that he may
not come; but he probably will.”
“But who is this person? How did you find him?”
“I’ll tell you. While we wait for this man we do not know — for I
have never met him — while we wait, I will tell you how my thoughts
went.” Dupin began to talk. But it did not seem that he was trying to
explain to me what he had thought. It seemed that he was talking to
himself. He looked not at me, but at the wall.
“It has been fully proved that the voices heard by the neighbors
were not the voices of the women who were killed. Someone else
was in the room. It is therefore certain that the old woman did not
first kill her daughter and then kill herself. She would not have been
strong enough to put her daughter’s body where it was found; and the
manner of the old lady’s death shows that she could not have caused
it herself. A per­son can kill himself with a knife, yes. But he surely
cannot cut his own head almost off, then drop the knife on the floor
and jump out the window. It was murder, then, done by some third
person — or persons. And the voices heard were the voic­es of these

49

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

persons. Let us now think carefully about the things people said about
those voices. Did you notice anything especially strange in what was
told about them?”
“Well, yes. Everybody agreed that the low voice was the voice of
a Frenchman; but they could not agree about the high voice.”
“Ah! That was what they said, yes; but that was not what was
so strange about what they said. You say you have noticed nothing
that makes their stories very different from what might have been
expected. Yet there was something. All these persons, as you say,
agreed about the low voice; but not about the high hard voice. The
strange thing here is that when an Italian, an Englishman, a Spaniard,
and a Frenchman tried to tell what the voice was like, each one said
it sounded like the voice of a foreigner. How strangely unusual that
voice really must have been! Here are four men from four big coun­
tries, and not one of them could understand what the voice said; each
one gave it a different name.
“Now, I know that there are other countries in the world. You will
say that perhaps it was the voice of someone from one of those other
lands — Russia, perhaps. But remem­ber, not one of these people heard
anything that sounded like a separate word.”
Here Dupin turned and looked into my eyes.
“This is what we have learned from the newspaper. I don’t know
what I have led you to think. But I believe that in this much of the
story there are enough facts to lead us in the one and only direction
to the right answer. What this answer is, I will not say…not yet. But I
want you to keep in mind that this much was enough to tell me what
I must look for when we were in that house on the Rue Morgue. And
I found it!”

50

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

p
The Murders in the Rue Morgue
Part Four

Murderers had come to the old house on the street called
the Rue Morgue! Murderers had come and gone and left behind the
dead bodies of an old woman and her daughter. The daughter’s body
was in the bedroom on the fourth floor. The old woman was lying
outside, behind the house, her head almost cut off; but the knife
which killed her was up in the bedroom, on the floor. The door and
the windows were all firmly closed, locked on the inside; there was no
way for anyone to go in or out. Voices had been heard. One voice was
speaking in French; the other voice had not spoken even one word
that anyone could understand. But there was no one in the room
when police arrived.
This much we had learned from the newspapers, my friend Dupin
and I. Interested by it, we had gone to look at the house and the bodies. Dupin was now explaining to me what he had learned there.
“That is what we learned from the newspapers. Please remember
it; for that much was enough to tell me what I must look for when we
were in that house on the Rue Morgue. And I found it!
“Let us now take ourselves again, in our thoughts, to the room
where the murders were done. What shall we first look for? The way
the murderers escaped. All right. We agree, I am sure, that we do not
have to look for anything outside of nature, for anything not having
a real form, a body. The killers were not spirits; they were real. They
could not go through the walls. Then how did they escape? There is
only one way to reason on that subject, and it must lead us to the
answer. Let us look, one at a time, at the possible ways to escape. It is

51

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

clear that the killers were in the room where the daughter was found.
From this room they must have escaped. How?
“At first I saw no way out. It had been necessary for the neighbors to break down the door in order to enter the room. There was no
other door. The opening above the fireplace is not big enough, near
the top, for even a small animal. The murderers therefore must have
escaped through one of the windows. This may not seem possible. We
must prove that it is possible.
“There are two windows in the room. Both of them, you will
remember, are made of two parts; to open the window one must lift up
the bottom half. One of these windows is easily seen; the lower part of
the other is out of sight behind the big bed. I looked carefully at the
first of these windows. It was firmly closed, fastened, like the door, on
the inside. To keep the window closed, to fasten it, someone had put a
strong iron nail into the wood at the side of the window in such a way
that the window could not be raised. At least it seemed that the nail
held the window closed. The nail was easy to see. There it was. And
the people who discovered the kil­l­ings used their greatest strength
and could not raise the win­­dow. I, too, tried to raise the window and
could not.
“I went to the second window and looked behind the bed at the
lower half of the window. There was a nail here, too, which held the
window closed. Without moving the bed, I tried to open this window
also, and again I could not do so.
“I did not stop looking for an answer, however, because I knew
that what did not seem possible must be proved to be possible. The
killers — or perhaps I should say, the killer, for I am almost certain
there was only one — the killer escaped through one of these windows. Of this I felt certain. After the murderer had left the bedroom
he could have closed the win­dow from the outside; but he could not
have fastened it again on the inside. Yet anyone could see the nails
which held the windows tightly closed. This was the fact that stopped
the police. How could the murderer put the nail back in its place?”
“Perhaps — perhaps if you pulled out the nail….”
“Yes! That is just what I thought. Two things seemed clear: first,
there had to be something wrong with the idea that the nails were
holding the windows closed. I didn’t know what was wrong. Something

52

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

was. Second, if it was not the nails which were holding the windows
closed, then something else was holding them closed, something hard
to see, some­thing hidden.
“I went back to the first window. With great effort I pulled out the
nail. Then I again tried to raise the window. It was still firmly closed.
This did not surprise me. There had to be a hidden lock, I thought,
inside the window. I felt the window carefully with my fingers. Indeed,
I found a button which, when I pressed it, opened an inner lock. With
almost no effort I raised the window.
“Now I knew that the killer could close the window from outside and the window would lock itself. But there was still the nail.
Carefully, I put the nail back into the hole from which I had taken it.
Then I pressed the button and tried to raise the window. I could not.
The nail also was holding the window closed!”
“Then…then the murderer could not possibly have gone out the
window.”
“He could not have gone out that window. Therefore, he must
have escaped through the other window. The other win­dow was also
held closed by a nail. But I knew I must be right. Although no one
else had looked carefully at the window behind the bed, I went to it
and tried to see whether the two windows were in some way different.
The nail in the second window looked the same as the one I had just
seen. I moved the bed so that I could look closely. Yes. There was a
button here, too. I was so sure I was right that without touching the
nail I pressed the button and tried to raise the window. Up it went!
“As the window went up it carried with it the top part of the nail,
the head. When I closed the window the head of the nail was again
in its place. It looked just as it had looked before. I took the head of
the nail in my fingers and it easily came away from the window. I saw
that the nail had been broken. But when I put the nail head back in
its place, the nail again looked whole.
“What seemed to be not possible we have proved to be possible.
The murderer indeed escaped through that window. I could now see,
in my mind, what had happened.
“It was a hot summer night. When the murderer first arrived
he found that window open, open to let some of the fresh night air
come in. Through the open window the mur­derer went in and came

53

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

out again. As he came out he closed the window, perhaps with a purpose to do so, perhaps by chance. The special lock inside the window
held the window firmly closed. The nail only seemed to be holding it
closed. And that which was possible looked not possible.”
Dupin had been talking not to me, it seemed, but to himself.
His cold eyes seemed to see only what was in his own mind. Now he
stopped and looked straight at me. His eyes were now hard and bright.
And I understood that using his unusual reasoning power to find the
answer to those bloody murders was giving Dupin great pleasure!
At first I could think only of this. Then I said: “Dupin — the
windows are on the fourth floor, far above the ground. Even an open
window….”
“Yes. That is an interesting question: how did the mur­derer go
from the window down to the ground? Once I was quite certain that
the murderer had in fact gone through that window the rest was not
so hard to know. And the answer to this question told me still more
about who the murderer was!
“When you and I first came to the house on the Rue Morgue
we walked around the house. At that time I noted a long, thin metal
pole which went from the top of the build­­ing to the ground — a
lightning rod, put there to carry down to the ground a charge of electricity that might come out of the clouds during a bad summer storm.
Here, I thought, is a way for someone to go up or down the wall, and
then to go in or out the window. He would have to be very strong.
Although certain animals could easily go up the pole, not every man
could do it — only a man with very special strength and special training. This told me more about what the murderer was like. But I still
had the question: who?”

54

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

p
The Murders in the Rue Morgue
Part Five

That unusual Frenchman, August
Dupin, was still explaining to me how
he found the answer to the question of
who murdered the two women in the
house on the Rue Morgue. We now
knew that it was indeed possible for
the killer to go in and again out one of
the windows and still leave them both
firmly closed, locked on the inside.
And I agreed with Dupin when he said
that only someone with very special
strength and training could have gone
up the lightning rod on the side of the house and thus entered the
window. But who the murderer was, we still did not know.
“Let us look again,” said Dupin, “at that room on the fourth
floor. Let us now go back, in our minds, to the room we saw yesterday.
Consider its appearance. Clothes had been thrown around the room;
yet it seemed that none had been taken. The old woman and her
daughter almost never left the house. They had little use for many
clothes. Those that were found in the room were as good as any they
had. If the killer took some, why didn’t he take the best — or take
all? And why would he take a few clothes and leave all the money?
Nearly the whole amount brought from the bank was found, in bags,
on the floor.

55

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

“I want you therefore to forget the idea in the minds of the police,
the idea that a desire for money was what they call the motive, the
reason for the murders. This idea rose in their minds when they heard
how the money was brought to the house three days before the killings.
But this is only what we call a coincidence — two things happening
at the same time, but only by chance and not because of some cause,
some cause that brought them together. Coincidences happen to all
of us every day of our lives. If the gold was the reason for the murders,
the killer must have been quite a fool to forget and leave it there.
“No. I don’t think the desire for money was the reason for the
killings. I think that there was no reason for these killings…except,
perhaps, fear.
“Now let us look at the murders themselves. A girl is killed by
powerful hands around her neck, then the body is placed in the opening over the fireplace, head down. No murders we usually hear about
are like this. There is something here that does not fit our ideas of
human actions, even when we think of men of the most terrible kind.
Think, also, of the great strength which was necessary to put the body
where it was found. The strength of several men was needed to pull
it down!
“There are other signs of this fearful strength. In front of the fireplace some gray human hair was lying, thick pieces of it, pulled from
the head of the old woman. You saw the hair on the floor yourself, and
you saw the blood and skin with it. You know, and I know, that great
force is necessary to pull out even twenty or thirty hairs at one time.
A much greater force was needed to pull out hundreds of hairs at one
time. Also, the head of the old lady was cut almost completely from
the body. Why? To kill a woman with a knife it is not necessary to cut
her head off!!
“If, now, added to all these things, we add also the condition of
the room, we have put together the following ideas: strength more
than human; wildness less than human; a murder without reason;
horror beyond human understanding; and a voice which made no
sound that men could understand. What result, then, have you come
to? What have I helped you to see?”

56

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

A cold feeling went up and down my back as Dupin asked me the
question. “A man…someone who has lost his mind,” I said. “A madman!! A madman!! Only a madman could have done these murders!”
“I think not. In some ways your idea is a good one. But madmen
are from one country or another. Their cries may be terrible, but they
are made of words, and some of the words can be understood.
“Here! Look! Look at this hair. I took it from the fin­gers of the
old woman. The hair of a madman is not like this. Tell me what you
think it is.”
“Dupin! This hair is…this hair is not human hair!!”
“I did not say that it is. But, before we decide this matter, look
at the picture I had made here on this piece of paper. It is a picture of
the marks on the daughter’s neck. The doctors said these marks were
made by fingers. Let me spread the paper on the table before us. Try
to put your fingers, all at the same time, on the picture, so that your
hand and its fingers will fit the picture of the marks on the daughter’s
neck.”
“I cannot!”
“No. But perhaps we are not doing this in the right way. The
paper is spread out on the table; the human neck is round. Here is
a piece of wood about as big as the daughter’s neck. Put the paper
around it and try again. Go on! Try!”
I tried to put my fingers around the piece of wood, as if it were
the girl’s neck! But still my hand was not large enough to equal the
marks left by the killer. “Dupin! These marks were made by no human
hand!”
“No. They were not. I am almost certain that they were made
by the hand of an orangutan, one of those man-like animals that live
in the wild forests. The great size, the strength, the wildness of these
animals are well known. Now. Look in this book by Cuvier. Read. Look
at the picture.”
I did so, and at once I knew that Dupin was right in everything
he said. The color of the hair…the size of the hand…the terrible
strength…the wildness of the kill­ings…those sounds which were a
voice but were not words…everything fit nicely in its place.
No, not everything. “Dupin!” I said. “There were two voices.
Whose was the second voice?”

57

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

“The second voice! Yes! Remember: we decided that only someone with a very special kind of strength could have gone up the lightning rod, up the side of the house to the window on the fourth floor
— perhaps an animal, perhaps a strong man from a circus, perhaps a
sailor. We know now that one of the voices was the voice of an animal, an orang­utan. The other was the voice of a man. This voice spoke
only two words; they were “My God!” spoken in French.
“Upon those two words I have placed my hopes of find­ing a full
answer to this horrible question. The words were an expression of
horror. This means that a Frenchman knew about these murders. It is
possible — indeed it is probable — that the Frenchman himself did
not help the orang­utan to kill. Perhaps the animal escaped from him,
and he followed it to the house on the Rue Morgue. He could not
have caught it again. It must still be free somewhere in Paris.
“I will not continue with these guesses — for I cannot call them
more than that. If I am right, and if the Frenchman did not himself
help with the killings, I expect him to come here. Read this. I paid to
have this put in the newspaper.”
I took the newspaper and read the following:
caught — Early in the morning of the seventh of this month: a very

large orangutan. The owner, who is known to be a sailor, may have
the animal again if he can prove it is his.
“But, Dupin. How can you know that the man is a sailor?”
“I do not know it. I am not sure of it. I think the man is a sailor.
A sailor could go up that pole on the side of the house. Sailors travel
to strange, faraway places where such things as orang­utans can be got.
If I am right….
“Think for a moment! The sailor will say to himself: ‘The animal
is valuable. Why shouldn’t I go and get it? The police do not know
the animal killed two women. And clearly somebody knows I am in
Paris. If I do not go to get the animal, they will ask why. I don’t want
anyone to start asking questions about the animal. So I will go and get
the orang­utan and keep it where no one will see it, until this trouble
has passed.’ This, I believe, is how the sailor will think. But listen! I
hear a man’s step on the stairs.”

58

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

Dupin had left the front door of the house open, and the visitor
entered without using the bell. He came several steps up the stairs,
then stopped. We heard him go down again. Dupin was moving toward
the door when we again heard the stranger coming up. He did not
turn back a second time, but came straight to the door of our room.
In a strong, warm, friendly voice, Dupin said:
“Come in, my friend! Come in!”
Slowly the door opened, and in came — a sailor!

59

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Murders in the Rue Morgue
Part Six

My friend Dupin was now certain that the murders in the
Rue Morgue had been done by a wild animal of the jungle, the manlike animal known as an orang­utan. The animal had escaped from its
owner, he thought; and the owner was prob­ably a sailor. He had put a
notice in the newspaper that the man who owned the orang­utan could
have it again if he came to our house to get it. Now, as the owner came
to our door, we were both wondering if that man would, as Dupin
guessed, be a sailor.
Yes. The man who entered was indeed a sailor. He was a large
man, and strong. He carried a big, heavy piece of wood, but no gun.
He said to us, in French: “Good evening.”
“Sit down, my friend. I suppose you have come to ask about the
orang­utan. A very fine animal. I have no doubt that it is a very valuable animal. How old do you think it may be?”
“I have no way of guessing how old it is, but it can’t be more than
four or five years old. Have you got it here?”

60

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

“No, no. We have no place for it here. You can get it in the morning. Of course you can prove it is yours?”
“Yes. Yes, I can.”
“I wish I could keep it.”
“I would like to have it. I…of course I will pay you for finding and
keeping the animal. Anything…anything within reason.”
“Well…That is very fair, indeed. Let me think. What shall I ask
for? I know! Let this be my pay. Tell me everything you know about
the murders in the Rue Morgue.”
As quietly as he had spoken Dupin walked to the door, locked it,
and put the key in his coat. At the same time he took a gun out of his
coat and placed it on the table.
The sailor’s face had become red. He jumped to his feet and
reached for his stick of wood, but in the next moment he fell back into
his chair, trembling. His face became quite white, bloodless. He spoke
not a word. His eyes were closed.
“My friend, you must not be afraid. We are not going to hurt
you. I know very well that you yourself are not the killer. But it is true
that you know something about him — or about it. From what I have
already said, you must know that I have ways of learning about the
matter — ways you could never have dreamed of.
“Now, I know that you yourself have done nothing wrong. You
didn’t even take any of the money. You have no reason to be afraid to
talk and to tell the truth. It is a matter of honor for you to tell all you
know. And you know who the killer is.”
“So help me God! I…I’ll tell you all I know about this, all I know
— but I don’t expect you to believe one half of what I say — not one
half. Still, I didn’t kill anyone, and I’ll tell the whole story if I die for
it. It was that animal! The orang­utan!…
“About a year ago our ship sailed to the Far East, to the island of
Borneo. I had never before seen Borneo. The forest, the jungle, was
thick with trees and other plants, and hot and wet and dark. But we
went — a friend and I — we went into that forest — for pleasure.
There we saw this orang­utan, a big animal. But we were two, and we
caught it. We took it with us on the ship. Soon, however, my friend
died, and the animal was mine. But it was very strong and caused a
lot of trouble.

61

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

“In the end I brought it back to Paris with me. I kept it in my
house, in my own house, carefully locked up, so the neighbors could
not know about it. The animal had cut one foot badly while on the
ship. I thought…I thought that as soon as it got well I would sell it. I
was certain it was of great value. And it was so much trouble to keep!
I wanted to sell it, soon.
“The night of the murders, very late, I came home and found the
animal in my bedroom. It had got free, I don’t know how. It held a
knife in its hands, and was playing with it. I was afraid. I didn’t know
what to do. When it saw me it jumped up, ran out of the room and
down the stairs. There it found an open window and jumped into the
street. I followed, never far behind, although I had no hope of catching it again. The animal, with the knife still in its hand, stopped often
to look back at me. But before I could come near enough to even try
to catch it, the animal always started to run again. It seemed to be
playing with me.
“It was nearly morning, but the streets were still dark, and quiet.
We passed the back of a house in the Rue Morgue. The animal looked
up and saw a light in the open window of a room high above. It was
the only lighted window in sight. The animal saw the metal pole, went
up it easily and quickly, and jumped into the room. All this didn’t take
a minute.
“I didn’t know what to do. I didn’t know what I could do. I followed the animal. I too went up the pole. As I am a sailor it was easy
for me. But the open window was far from the pole and I was afraid
to try to jump. I could see into the room, however, through the other
window, which was closed.
“The two women were sitting there, with their backs to the windows. Who can guess why they were not sleeping at that hour of the
night? A box was in the middle of the floor. The papers which had
been in the box were lying around on the floor. The women seemed
to be studying some of these. They did not see the animal, which was
just standing there, watching, the knife still in one hand. But the old
woman heard it and turned her head and saw the animal there, knife
in hand, and then…then I heard the first of those terrible cries.
“When the animal heard the old woman’s cry it caught her by the
hair and slowly moved the knife before her face. The daughter, filled

62

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

with terror, fell to the floor and re­­mained there without moving, her
eyes closed. The old woman continued to cry for help, screaming with
fear. I think the animal now was as afraid as the old woman was. With
terrible force it pulled out a handful of hair. And when the woman,
covered with blood, tried to run from it, the animal caught her again
by the hair and with one move of its arm it nearly cut her head from
her body. Throwing down the body, the animal turned and saw that
the daughter was moving, watching it with horror. With fire in its eyes
it rushed to the girl, put its powerful fingers around her neck, and
pressed them firmly there until she died.
“When the girl stopped moving, the animal dropped her body to
the floor and looked up. It saw my face in the win­dow. It began to run
around the room, quickly, without pur­pose. It jumped up and down,
breaking the chairs, pulling the bed to pieces. Suddenly it stopped
and took the body of the daughter and, as if to hide it, with terrible
strength it put the body up above the fireplace, where it was found. It
threw the old woman out the window.
“All this time I was hanging from the pole, filled with horror. It
seemed I had lost the power to move. But when I saw the animal coming toward the window with the old woman’s body, my horror became
fear. I went quickly down — I almost fell down the pole, and I ran. I
didn’t look back. I ran! Oh, my God! My God!”
The Chief of the police was not happy that the answer to the
mystery of the killings had been found by someone who was not a
policeman. He said that people should keep to their own business.
“Let him talk,” said Dupin.
“Let him talk. He’ll feel better for it. And he’s a good fellow.
But he makes things less simple than they really are. Still, people call
him skillful, and even wise. I think they say this because of the way
he explains, carefully, fully, something which is not here, or there, or
anywhere; and says, ‘Not possible!’ about something which is there
before his eyes.”

63

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
T h e Te l l - Ta l e H e a r t

I

Listen! Listen, and I will tell
you how it happened. You will see, you will hear how healthy my mind
is.
It is impossible to say how the idea first entered my head. There
was no reason for what I did. I did not hate the old man; I even loved
him. He had never hurt me. I did not want his money. I think it was
his eye. His eye was like the eye of a vulture, the eye of one of those
terrible birds that watch and wait while an animal dies, and then fall
upon the dead body and pull it to pieces to eat it. When the old man
looked at me with his vulture eye a cold feeling went up and down my

64

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

back; even my blood became cold. And so, I finally decided I had to
kill the old man and close that eye forever!
So you think that I am mad? A madman cannot plan. But you
should have seen me. During all of that week I was as friendly to the
old man as I could be, and warm, and loving.
Every night about twelve o’clock I slowly opened his door. And
when the door was opened wide enough I put my hand in, and then
my head. In my hand I held a light covered over with a cloth so that
no light showed. And I stood there quietly. Then, carefully, I lifted the
cloth, just a little, so that a single, thin, small light fell across that eye.
For seven nights I did this, seven long nights, every night at midnight.
Always the eye was closed, so it was impossible for me to do the work.
For it was not the old man I felt I had to kill; it was the eye, his Evil
Eye.
And every morning I went to his room, and with a warm, friendly
voice I asked him how he had slept. He could not guess that every
night, just at twelve, I looked in at him as he slept.
The eighth night I was more than usually careful as I opened
the door. The hands of a clock move more quickly than did my hand.
Never before had I felt so strongly my own power; I was now sure of
success.
The old man was lying there not dreaming that I was at his door.
Suddenly he moved in his bed. You may think I became afraid. But no.
The darkness in his room was thick and black. I knew he could not see
the opening of the door. I continued to push the door, slowly, softly. I
put in my head. I put in my hand, with the covered light. Suddenly the
old man sat straight up in bed and cried, “Who’s there??!”
I stood quite still. For a whole hour I did not move. Nor did I
hear him again lie down in his bed. He just sat there, listening. Then I
heard a sound, a low cry of fear which escaped from the old man. Now
I knew that he was sitting up in his bed, filled with fear; I knew that he
knew that I was there. He did not see me there. He could not hear me
there. He felt me there. Now he knew that Death was standing there.
Slowly, little by little, I lifted the cloth, until a small, small light
escaped from under it to fall upon — to fall upon that vulture eye!
It was open — wide, wide open, and my anger increased as it looked
straight at me. I could not see the old man’s face. Only that eye, that

65

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

hard blue eye, and the blood in my body became like ice.
Have I not told you that my hearing had become un­­usually
strong? Now I could hear a quick, low, soft sound, like the sound of a
clock heard through a wall. It was the beating of the old man’s heart.
I tried to stand quietly. But the sound grew louder. The old man’s fear
must have been great indeed. And as the sound grew louder my anger
became greater and more painful. But it was more than anger. In the
quiet night, in the dark silence of the bedroom my anger became
fear — for the heart was beating so loudly that I was sure some one
must hear. The time had come! I rushed into the room, crying, “Die!
Die!” The old man gave a loud cry of fear as I fell upon him and held
the bedcovers tightly over his head. Still his heart was beating; but
I smiled as I felt that success was near. For many minutes that heart
continued to beat; but at last the beating stopped. The old man was
dead. I took away the bed­covers and held my ear over his heart. There
was no sound. Yes. He was dead! Dead as a stone. His eye would
trouble me no more!
So I am mad, you say? You
should have seen how care­
ful I
was to put the body where no one
could find it. First I cut off the
head, then the arms and the legs. I
was careful not to let a single drop
of blood fall on the floor. I pulled
up three of the boards that formed
the floor, and put the pieces of the
body there. Then I put the boards
down again, care­fully, so carefully
that no human eye could see that
they had been moved.
As I finished this work I
heard that someone was at the
door. It was now four o’clock in
the morning, but still dark. I had
no fear, however, as I went down
to open the door. Three men were
at the door, three officers of the

66

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

police. One of the neighbors had heard the old man’s cry and had
called the police; these three had come to ask questions and to search
the house.
I asked the policemen to come in. The cry, I said, was my own, in
a dream. The old man, I said, was away; he had gone to visit a friend
in the country. I took them through the whole house, telling them to
search it all, to search well. I led them finally into the old man’s bedroom. As if playing a game with them I asked them to sit down and
talk for a while.
My easy, quiet manner made the policemen believe my story. So
they sat talking with me in a friendly way. But although I answered
them in the same way, I soon wished that they would go. My head hurt
and there was a strange sound in my ears. I talked more, and faster.
The sound became clearer. And still they sat and talked.
Suddenly I knew that the sound was not in my ears, it was not
just inside my head. At that moment I must have become quite white.
I talked still faster and louder. And the sound, too, became louder. It
was a quick, low, soft sound, like the sound of a clock heard through a
wall, a sound I knew well. Louder it became, and louder. Why did the
men not go? Louder, louder. I stood up and walked quickly around the
room. I pushed my chair across the floor to make more noise, to cover
that terrible sound. I talked even louder. And still the men sat and
talked, and smiled. Was it possible that they could not hear??
No! They heard! I was certain of it. They knew! Now it was they
who were playing a game with me. I was suffering more than I could
bear, from their smiles, and from that sound. Louder, louder, louder!
Suddenly I could bear it no longer. I pointed at the boards and cried,
“Yes! Yes, I killed him. Pull up the boards and you shall see! I killed
him. But why does his heart not stop beating?! Why does it not stop!?”

67

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

p
The Cask of Amontillado

F

I gave Fortunato no cause to doubt me. I continued to smile in
his face, and he did not understand that I was now smiling at the
thought of what I planned for him, at the thought of my revenge.
Fortunato was a strong man, a man to be feared. But he had one
great weakness: he liked to drink good wine, and indeed he drank
much of it. So he knew a lot about fine wines, and proudly believed
that he was a trained judge of them. I, too, knew old wines well, and

68

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

I bought the best I could find. And wine, I thought, wine would give
me my revenge!
It was almost dark, one evening in the spring, when I met
Fortunato in the street, alone. He spoke to me more warmly than was
usual, for already he had drunk more wine than was good for him. I
acted pleased to see him, and I shook his hand, as if he had been my
closest friend.
“Fortunato! How are you?”
“Montresor! Good evening, my friend.”
“My dear Fortunato! I am indeed glad that I have met you. I
was just thinking of you. For I have been tasting my new wine. I have
bought a full cask of a fine wine which they tell me is Amontillado.
But….”
“Amontillado! Quite impossible.”
“I know. It does not seem possible. As I could not find you I
was just going to talk to Luchresi. If anyone understands wines it is
Luchresi. He will tell me….”
“Luchresi? He does not know one wine from another!”
“But they say he knows as much about wines as you know.”
“Ho! — Come. Let us go.”
“Go where?”
“To your vaults. To taste the wine.”
“No, my friend, no. I can see that you are not well. And the
vaults are cold and wet.”
“I do not care. Let us go. I’m well enough. The cold is nothing.
Amontillado! Someone is playing games with you. And Luchresi! Ha!
Luchresi knows nothing about wines, nothing at all.”
As he spoke, Fortunato took my arm, and I allowed him to hurry
me to my great stone palace, where my family, the Montresors, had
lived for centuries. There was no one at home. I had told the servants
that they must not leave the palace, as I would not return until the
following morning and they must care for the place. This, I knew, was
enough to make it certain that they would all leave as soon as my back
was turned.
I took down from their places on the wall two brightly burning
lights. I gave one of these to Fortunato and led him to a wide doorway.
There we could see the stone steps going down into the darkness.

69

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

Asking him to be careful as he followed, I went down before him,
down under the ground, deep under the old walls of my palace. We
came finally to the bottom of the steps and stood there a moment
together. The earth which formed the floor was cold and hard. We
were entering the last resting place of the dead of the Montresor family. Here too we kept our finest wines, here in the cool, dark, still air
under the ground.
Fortunato’s step was not sure, because of the wine he had been
drinking. He looked uncertainly around him, trying to see through
the thick darkness which pushed in around us. Here our brightly burning lights seemed weak indeed. But our eyes soon became used to the
darkness. We could see the bones of the dead lying in large piles along
the walls. The stones of the walls were wet and cold.
From the long rows of bottles which were lying on the floor,
among the bones, I chose one which contained a very good wine.
Since I did not have anything to open the bottle with, I struck the
stone wall with it and broke off the small end. I offered the bottle to
Fortunato.
“Here, Fortunato. Drink some of this fine Medoc. It will help to
keep us warm. Drink!”
“Thank you, my friend. I drink to the dead who lie sleeping
around us.”
“And I, Fortunato — I drink to your long life.”
“Ahh! A very fine wine, indeed! But the Amontillado?”
“It is farther on. Come.”
We walked on for some time. We were now under the river’s bed,
and water fell in drops upon us from above. Deeper into the ground
we went, past still more bones.
“Your vaults are many, and large. There seems to be no end to
them.”
“We are a great family, and an old one. It is not far now. But I
can see you are trembling with the cold. Come! Let us go back before
it is too late.”
“It is nothing. Let us go on. But first, another drink of your
Medoc!”
I took up from among the bones another bottle. It was another
wine of a fine quality, a De Grâve. Again I broke off the neck of the

70

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

bottle. Fortunato took it and drank it all without stopping for a breath.
He laughed, and threw the empty bottle over his shoulder.
We went on, deeper and deeper into the earth. Finally we arrived
at a vault in which the air was so old and heavy that our lights almost
died. Against three of the walls there were piles of bones higher
than our heads. From the fourth wall someone had pulled down all
the bones, and they were spread all around us on the ground. In the
middle of the wall was an opening into another vault, if I can call it
that — a little room about three feet wide, six or seven feet high, and
perhaps four feet deep. It was hardly more than a hole in the wall.
“Go on,” I said. “Go in; the
Amontillado is in there.”
Fortunato continued to go
forward, uncertainly. I fol­
lowed
him immediately. Soon, of course,
he reached the back wall. He
stood there a moment, facing the
wall, surprised and wondering.
In that wall were two heavy iron
rings. A short chain was hanging
from one of these and a lock
from the other. Before Fortunato
could guess what was happening,
I closed the lock and chained him
tightly to the wall. I stepped back.
“Fortunato,” I said. “Put your hand against the wall. You must
feel how the water runs over it. Once more I ask you, please, will you
not go back? No? If not, then I must leave you. But first I must do
everything I can for you.”
“But…But the Amontillado?”
“Ah, yes, yes indeed; the Amontillado.”
As I spoke these words I began to search among the bones.
Throwing them to one side I found the stones which earlier I had
taken down from the wall. Quickly I began to build the wall again,
covering the hole where Fortunato stood trembling.
“Montresor! What are you doing!?”

71

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

I continued working. I could hear him pulling at the chain, shaking it wildly. Only a few stones remained to put in their place.
“Montresor! Ha-ha. This is a very good joke, indeed. Many times
will we laugh about it — ha-ha — as we drink our wine together —
ha-ha.”
“Of course. As we drink the Amontillado.”
“But is it not late? Should we not be going back? They will be
expecting us. Let us go.”
“Yes. Let us go.”
As I said this I lifted the last stone from the ground.
“Montresor! For the love of God!!”
“Yes. For the love of God!”
I heard no answer. “Fortunato!” I cried. “Fortunato.” I heard only
a soft, low sound, a half-cry of fear. My heart grew sick; it must have
been the cold. I hurried to force the last stone into its position. And
I put the old bones again in a pile against the wall. For half a century
now no human hand has touched them. May he rest in peace!

72

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

Glossary
(Meanings explained here are only for the use of the words in this book.)
alike (adv)

very similar, almost the same

astonish (v)

to surprise or amaze someone

atom (n)

the smallest part of a chemical element that can exist and still
be that element. If we break an iron atom into its smaller parts,
the parts are no longer iron.

beam (n)

a strong piece of wood or concrete used to support the roof of a
house

belongings (n)

things that someone owns

bleeding (n)

blood that is coming out of a cut or wound

brightly (adv)

with a lot of light; shiny

cask (n)

a large wooden container used to store alcohol, water, or other
liquids

cellar (n)

a room under a building, often used to keep supplies

changeable (adj)

likely to change

circus (n)

a traveling show of horses, wild animals, performers, etc.

cobblestone (n)

a round stone used for paving streets. One can still find
cobblestone streets in many old cities.

coincidence (n)

happening at the same time by chance or without planning

coldly (adv)

behaving or acting calmly without being disturbed by emotion

coldness (n)

a feeling of cold because of low temperature; a lack of warmth;
a lack of friendliness or other emotion

costume (n)

clothing that is used to dress up as a character, often meant to
conceal a person’s identity

covering (n)

a cloth used to cover a wall

73

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

damp (adj)

not dry; wet but not very wet

dare (v)

to have the courage or be brave enough to do something

deadly (adv)

able to cause death or kill

dearly (adv)

greatly or with much love

decay (n)

a process that begins after death when something begins to
break down, rot, and smell very bad

decaying (adj)

bad smelling and rotten because of being dead for a long time

deepest (adj)

as deep as is possible, the furthest down

delight (n)

great pleasure or happiness

delighted (adj)

with great pleasure, very pleased or excited

delightful (adj)

very pleasing or beautiful

destroyer (n)

something or someone that ruins and destroys

distantly (adv)

being far away

earring (n)

a piece of jewelry worn on the ear

earthly (adj)

possible in the real world, of the earth

evenly (adv)

of the same height, size, amount; in a smooth or equal manner

ever-remembered (adj) remembered forever or always
faraway (adj)

not near, distant, remote

fasten (v)

to close something tightly or securely

fearful (adj)

causing fear or terror

fireplace (n)

a place in the wall of a room where wood is burned to warm
the room

firmly (adv)

tightly, completely, securely

fool (n)

a person who behaves recklessly or stupidly

footstep (n)

a step a person takes while walking

74

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

forceful (adj)

powerful; strong

foreigner (n)

a person from another country

frighten (v)

to cause fear

frightening (adj)

scary or terrible, causing fear

gambler (n)

a person who often plays games that involve winning or losing
money

ghastly (adj)

very white, pale; like a ghost

gloom (n)

heavy sadness; sadness without hope

gloomy (adj)

very sad, without hope; dark

goldfish (n)

a small gold or orange-colored fish, often kept as a pet

grave (n)

a hole in the ground where dead bodies are buried

grave-clothes (n) the clothing put on a dead person
graveyard (n)

a place where dead people are buried

hanging (n)

a decoration put on the wall like a piece of cloth or art

horseback (n)

the place on a horse where a rider sits; traveling by riding a
horse

hotly (adv)

strongly; intensely

hotness (n)

a personality that easily gets excited; often impatient and may
be easily angered

humanly (adv)

within the ability of humans; given the qualities of human
beings

hurry (v)

to move in a rushed manner

hurried (adj)

in a quick, rushed way

icy (adj)

very cold, like ice; unfriendly

inn (n)

a place where a person can pay to sleep and eat, a hotel

innkeeper (n)

a person who owns or cares for an inn

75

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

jungle (n)

a tropical environment where wild animals like monkeys live

lighten (v)

to make or become lighter and brighter, to make less dark; to
make less heavy

lighthearted (adj)

happy and without worry

lightning rod (n)

a thin rod of metal reaching above a building and connected to
the earth. It is a conductor to carry the lightning to the ground
so that it will not strike the building.

likeness (n)

similarity or sameness

long-continued (adj)

drawn out, carried on

low-hanging (adj)

something that hangs, that is noticeably close to the ground

madman (n)

a crazy person, a person who acts without reason

masquerade (n)

a party where the people wear masks to cover their faces

masquerader (n)

a person who wears a mask at a party

motive (n)

the reason a person does something. Usually a person has a
motive or a reason for committing a crime.

murderer (n)

a person who kills another person

mysterious (adj)

strange, unusual, containing questions which cannot be
answered

mysteriously (adv) in a strange or unusual way
neighboring (adj)

next to or very near, close by

nervously (adv)

feeling uncertain about the future; being afraid because of
doubt

nervousness (n)

the feeling of being uncertain about the future, worried and
unhappy

never-ending (adj)

without a finish or end

never-to-be-forgotten
(adj)

remembered forever

noticeable (adj)

easily seen or observed

76

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

openly (adv)

in a direct way, without an attempt to hide or conceal

orangutan (n)

a type of primate like a monkey, orange in color

palace (n)

a large, beautiful building where royalty usually live

pet (v)

to stroke or touch gently, usually to touch an animal like a dog

plain (adj)

undecorated, simple; obvious or easily seen

plainly (adv)

obvious, easily seen

play-actor (n)

a person who acts in a play or drama

playground (n)

a place where children play outside, usually on equipment like
swings or slides

probable (adj)

likely

proudly (adv)

with a sense of honor for something well done

revenge (n)

the act of paying back a wrong or injury

riches (n)

money or valuable items

richness (n)

the state of having a lot of money or things of great value

rightly (adv)

in a correct way or manner

ruler (n)

someone who is in charge, like a king or leader

sail (v)

to pilot or steer a boat that has sails

sailor (n)

a person who works on a ship or boat

schoolfellow (n)

a male person who attends school

secret (adj)

unknown or unseen by others, hidden

secretly (adv)

done in a way unknown or unseen by others

seize (v)

to quickly capture or take hold of

servant (n)

a person who is paid to work in someone else’s house doing
things like cooking and cleaning

sharpness (n)

the quality of being sharp or of keen intellect

77

E d g a r

shine (v)
shining (adj)

A l l a n

P o e

to reflect light
reflecting light, bright

shopkeeper (n)

a person who manages a small store or shop

sicken (v)

to make physically ill or sick

sickening (n)

the state of becoming physically ill

sickening (adj)

making physically ill or sick

sickly (adj)

not healthy, showing signs of physical illness

skillful (adj)

with talent or special ability

spirit-quieting (adj)

calming, tranquil

stillness (n)

without movement, the state of not moving

stormy (adj)

with bad weather such as thunderstorms or lightning

strangely (adv)

in a manner that is not normal, in an odd way

strangeness (n)

something that is not normal, may be bothersome or odd

sunrise (n)

the time when the sun comes up in the morning

sweetness (n)

the quality of smelling sweet, like a flower or candy

sword (n)

a long piece of metal with a sharp pointed edge, used for
fighting

thoughtful (adj)

with care and consideration

tightly (adv)

securely; snug and close to the body

tremble (v)

to physically shake because of fear

trembling (adj)

shaking because of fear

trembling (n)

the act of shaking because of fear

trouble (v)
troubled (adj)

to make worried or bothered
worrisome or bothersome

78

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e :

S t o r y t e l l e r

turning (n)

change of direction

uncertainly (adv)

without sureness or exact direction

uncover (v)

to remove a cover in order to show what is underneath

unhealthy (adj)

not well, sick; not good for the health

unspoken (adj)

not said out loud

uplifted (adj)

raised or turned upward

useless (adj)

unable to do what needs to be done

uselessness (n)

the state of being unable to do what needs to be done,
incapable

vault (n)

a large room underground where things are stored (such
as wine, valuable things, and sometimes the bodies of dead
people)

violet (adj)

a color very similar to purple

vulture (n)

a large bird that feeds on meat

warmly (adv)

with affection, showing closeness or kindness

warmth (n)

a feeling of welcome and affection, friendliness

washwoman (n)

a female who cleans clothing

watchful (adj)

always observing or paying close attention to actions

weaken (v)

to make something weak or not strong

weakly (adv)

with little physical strength

well-known (adj)

recognized by many people

well-shaped (adj)

with a visually pleasing form

wholly (adv)

completely or entirely

widen (v)

to make the space between two objects larger

wildly (adv)

in an uncontrolled way

79

E d g a r

A l l a n

P o e

wildness (n)

something that is uncontrolled or not tame

worldly (adj)

something related to natural life, not spiritual life

wrong (n)

an action that is not good, evil, or bad

wrongdoing (n)

an action that may be evil or bad, legally or morally

80

GPS Designed, produced, and printed by Global Publishing Solutions (A/GIS/GPS) © (13-20507-E-1.0)

Edgar Allan Poe: Storyteller
Seven Stories Adapted from Edgar Allan Poe
Also in this series:
The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn
by Mark Twain
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer
by Mark Twain
The Autobiography of Mark Twain
by Mark Twain
The Gift of the Magi and Other Stories
by O. Henry
The Red Badge of Courage and Other Stories
by Stephen Crane

0204

To Build a Fire and Other Stories
by Jack London

SUDHA MURTY
GRANDMA’S BAG OF STORIES
Illustrations By Priya Kuriyan

PUFFIN BOOKS

Contents
The Beginning of the Stories
‘Doctor, Doctor’
Kavery and the Thief
Who Was the Happiest of Them All?
The Enchanted Scorpions
The Horse Trap
A Treasure for Ramu
The Donkey and the Stick
‘What’s in It for Me?’
The Princess’s New Clothes
The Story of Paan
Payasam for a Bear
Fire on the Beard
The Way You Look at It
Roopa’s Great Escape
Five Spoons of Salt
How the Seasons Got Their Share
The Island of Statues
The Kingdom of Fools
The Story of Silk
When Yama Called
The Unending Story
Follow Penguin

Copyright

PUFFIN BOOKS
GRANDMA’S BAG OF STORIES

Sudha Murty was born in 1950 in Shiggaon in north Karnataka. She did her
MTech in computer science, and is now the chairperson of the Infosys
Foundation. A prolific writer in English and Kannada, she has written novels,
technical books, travelogues, collections of short stories and non-fictional
pieces, and four books for children. Her books have been translated into all
the major Indian languages. Sudha Murty was the recipient of the R.K.
Narayan Award for Literature and the Padma Shri in 2006, and the Attimabbe
Award from the government of Karnataka for excellence in Kannada literature
in 2011.

Author’s Note

My grandmother, Krishnaa, popularly known as Krishtakka, was very bright
and affectionate. She was also a great storyteller. She never gave us any
sermons but taught the values of life through her stories. Those stories and
values remain with me even now. I spent my childhood carefree, stress-free,
with my cousins and grandparents at my hometown Shiggaon, a sleepy town
in north Karnataka. We shared everything there, whatever we had, and that
became a great bond among us cousins. The binding force was my
grandmother.
I made some changes when I wrote the stories in this book but mostly it is a
true reflection of my childhood.
When my granddaughter Krishnaa was born, she elevated me to the
position of grandmother. I realized more than ever the importance of stories,
and how much they help children to learn. Hence this book.
I hope, with these stories, children and parents will understand the unique
relationship between three generations and will continue to create bonds of
love with one another and the older generations in their families.
I would like to thank Penguin Books India, who are always eager to publish
my work. I would also like to thank Sudeshna Shome Ghosh, who became a
good friend apart from being my editor, in my journey of writing, in the last
decade.
Sudha Murty
Bangalore

Read more in Puffin
The Magic Drum and Other Favourite Stories by Sudha Murty
A princess who thinks she was a bird, a coconut that cost a thousand rupees,
and a shepherd with a bag of words . . .
Kings and misers, princes and paupers, wise men and foolish boys, the
funniest and oddest men and women come alive in this sparkling new
collection of stories. The clever princess will only marry the man who can ask
her a question she cannot answer; the orphan boy outwits his greedy uncles
with a bag of ash; and an old couple in distress is saved by a magic drum.
Sudha Murty’s grandparents told her some of these stories when she was a
child; others she heard from her friends from around the world. These
delightful and timeless folk tales have been her favourites for years, and she
has recounted them many times over to the young people in her life. With this
collection, they will be enjoyed by many more readers, of all ages.

Read more in Puffin
How I Taught My Grandmother to Read and Other Stories by Sudha Murty
What do you do when your grandmother asks you to teach her the alphabet?
Or the President of India takes you on a train ride with him?
Or your teacher gives you more marks than you deserve?
These are just some of the questions you will find answered in this delightful
collection of stories recounting real-life incidents from the life of Sudha
Murty—teacher, social worker and bestselling writer. There is the engaging
story about one of her students who frequently played truant from school. The
account of how her mother’s advice to save money came in handy when she
wanted to help her husband start a software company, and the heart-warming
tale of the promise she made—and fulfilled—to her grandfather, to ensure
that her little village library would always be well supplied with books.
Funny, spirited and inspiring, each of these stories teaches a valuable lesson
about the importance of doing what you believe is right and having the
courage to realize your dreams.

To Krishnaa, who has taken me back to my
childhood memories, from Sudha Ajji

The Beginning of the Stories

Summer holidays! Ajji smiled to herself as she waited for two more of her
grandchildren to arrive. Raghu and Meenu would be here soon. Anand and
Krishna had already arrived with their mother the previous evening. They had
been waiting restlessly for their cousins to arrive ever since. Even though Ajji
told them Raghu and Meenu would be here the next morning, these two kids
just would not listen. They went to the railway station with their grandfather,
Ajja, to receive them. The train must have pulled into the tiny railway station
of Shiggaon by now, and their grandfather would have hired a taxi to bring
them home along with their mother and the stacks of luggage.
Ajji hurried through her bath. She had finished cooking their favourite
dishes, and was now wearing a nice, soft cotton sari before going to the
veranda to wait for them.
There! There they came! What a noise the children were making! They all
nearly tumbled out of the car and came leaping and shouting to her, each
wanting to be the first to be hugged by her. Each one wanted to be closest to
Ajji.
Soon the children settled down. A visit to Ajji and Ajja’s house meant first
inspecting the garden to see how much the plants had grown since they last
came. Then they went to check on the cows, calves, dog, pups, cats and
kittens. Then they all ate huge quantities of Ajji’s delicious food. Finally,
while their mothers went off to chat and rest, the children gathered around
their grandmother for the best part of the holidays—listening to her wonderful
stories, particularly in the late afternoon.
Let us, too, gather under the fast revolving fan, on a mat on the floor,
fighting to be nearest to her, and listen in.

‘Doctor, Doctor’

The first day, the children asked, ‘Ajji, how do you know so many stories?’
Ajji smiled and answered, ‘My grandmother told me many stories. Some I
read in books. A few I learnt from youngsters like you, and the rest from your
Ajja.’ Then Ajji paused and said, ‘I see all of you have grown a lot since the
last time I saw you. So before I start telling any stories, I want to know what
each of you want to be when you grow up.’
Raghu, who was eleven years old, and the oldest of all, said immediately, ‘I
want to be an environment scientist.’ Meenu, who was nine, said, ‘I have not
decided, maybe a computer person like my dad.’ Anand, who was ten, said, ‘I
want to be an astronaut,’ and his twin sister Krishna firmly said, ‘I want to
become a fashion designer.’ Ajji smiled. ‘I am glad all of you have thought
about this. We should always have some aim in life which we must try to
achieve while being of help to others. Now let me tell you a story of a person
who learnt just such a lesson.’
Shall we, too, join Ajji and her gang of young friends and hear the story?

On a blazing hot summer afternoon, an old man came walking down a narrow
village path. He was tired and thirsty. Right by the road, he spotted a tiny
grocery store. It had a tin roof and mud walls. The shopkeeper sat inside
fanning himself and shooing away the flies that were buzzing around in the
stifling heat. There was a little bench in front of the store where the villagers
met when evening came and the land had cooled down. The old man flopped

down on the bench. He was so tired that for a while he could not speak.
Finally, he opened his mouth and uttered one word, ‘Water!’

Now, this village had been facing a horrible problem for a long time. It was
near a great desert and the rains came only once a year to fill its ponds and
wells. But the rains had disappeared for the last two years, and the villagers
had been making do with water from a faraway stream. Every morning groups
of men and women walked a long distance, filled their pots from the little
stream and used that the whole day. Naturally, no one wanted to waste even a
drop of this precious water.
Yet how do you say no to a thirsty, tired old man when he asks for water?
Without a second thought, the shopkeeper, Ravi, who was very kindhearted,
poured out a tumbler of water from his pot and gave it to the old man. The
man drank it up greedily. Then he said one more word: ‘More!’ And without
waiting for Ravi to give it to him, he lunged for the pot, picked it up and
lifting it to his lips drank up Ravi’s entire day’s supply of water!
Poor Ravi, what could he do? He just stared in dismay. Then he told
himself, ‘Never mind. After all, I did help someone in need.’
The stranger, meanwhile, now seemed to feel better. He handed the pot
back to Ravi, gave a smile that filled Ravi’s heart with warmth and said, ‘My
son, always be kind like this. Help everyone who comes to you like you
helped me, and you will be blessed.’ Then he picked up his stick and slowly
hobbled down the road. Ravi watched the strange old man disappear into the
distance, then returned to his shop.
The afternoon heat grew worse. After a while Ravi felt his head was about
to burst with a headache. His lips were parched and his throat hurt, it was so
dry. He really needed a drink of water. But the visitor had finished it all up!
Hoping to coax a drop or two out of the pot, Ravi lifted it to his lips and tilted
it. Imagine his surprise when a gush of water ran down his face! It was sweet,
refreshing water which not only quenched his thirst, but wiped out his
headache too.
Ravi was staring at the water pot, trying to figure out what had just
happened, when Karim limped into his shop. Karim was a young man who
had hurt his leg in an accident many years ago which had left him with a limp.
When he was unwell or tired, his limp became worse. Karim, too, flopped
down on the bench in front of the store and caught his breath, like the old
man. Then he fished out a shopping list from his pocket and handed it to Ravi.
As Ravi started packing up the items listed on the paper, Karim opened a little
bundle of food and ate his lunch sitting on the bench. Finally he wiped his

mouth on his scarf and pointed to Ravi’s pot of water. ‘Mind if I take a little
sip? It is so hot after all.’
Ravi was busy measuring out some dal. He said without looking up, ‘I
would be happy to offer you some, but someone’s already had most of it.
Then I was feeling unwell and I think I finished the last of it.’
‘What are you saying, my friend? I can clearly see the pot brimming over
with water!’
Ravi looked up and stared in disbelief. In front of his eyes, Karim poured
out a tumblerful of water and drank it. Then he paid for all his groceries and
left the store.
Did his limp look as if it was nearly gone? Ravi watched him for a while
trying to figure out, then decided the heat was playing tricks on his mind and
went back into the cool comfort of his shop and dozed off.
He woke with a start as someone was calling his name urgently. He opened
his eyes to find Karim back. This time he was holding by the hand his little
sister Fatima. ‘Brother, wake up. We need your help,’ Karim urged.
‘Wh-what? Is something wrong?’
‘Fatima is burning up with fever!’
‘Then go to a doctor, why have you got her to a grocery shop?’
Karim stared at him and said, ‘You mean you don’t know how you just
helped me? My leg, which has been troubling me for the last many years,
healed up on its own as soon as I drank the water from your magic pitcher!
Give Fatima a drink from it, too. I am sure her fever will disappear in no
time.’
Ravi was astounded. Magic pitcher? Healing water? What was Karim
going on about? Nonetheless he passed the pot to Fatima. She drank a bit,
then sat down to rest. Within minutes she lifted her head and said, ‘It is true,
brothers! I am indeed cured of the fever!’
Soon the news spread in the village like wildfire. Ravi, the quiet, kind
grocery storekeeper, was now the owner of a magic pitcher, the waters from
which could heal anyone of any disease. Every night Ravi left the pitcher in
the store, and in the morning it would be filled to the brim with sweet, cool
water. Daily, a queue of sick people and their relatives collected in front of his
shop. To each one Ravi gave a drink of the water, and they went away saying
they were now better. The pot was never empty. Ravi realized the old man he
had helped must have given him this gift in gratitude. Ravi understood what a
great gift it was and thanked him daily in his mind.

Soon his little store turned into a hospital. Ravi did not charge a paisa for
the water. People would leave some money, some gifts for him, and others did
not pay him anything but he was still happy with that.
One day, a rich landlord’s servant appeared at his doorstep and said, ‘My
master is unwell. Come with me and give him a drink of your water.’
Ravi replied, ‘See the crowd of people behind you, waiting for their turn.
How can I leave without helping them and go to your master? Do you think
these sick people can stand in the sun for long? Tell your master to come to
me instead and I will give him the water here.’
The servant said, ‘Ravi, what will you get by helping these poor people? A
few rupees? Some rice and dal? Come to my master’s house. He will shower
you with money and gifts. Your worries about making ends meet will be over
for at least a month.’
Ravi was tempted. It was true, why not cure one rich man and get some
help in buying his daily needs? Ravi told the people waiting outside to come
back the next day and went with the servant to the landlord.
Slowly, in this way, Ravi changed. Where once he could not bear to see the
pain and sadness of the sick and poor people, he now started each day hoping
he would get one rich patient at least, who would pay him handsomely.
Days passed thus. Seasons changed and it was summer once more. Ravi
was in his old store, writing up his accounts, when the voice of an old man
quavered in his ear, ‘Son, water!’
Startled, he looked up. Was it the same old man who had given him the gift
of the magic pitcher? But right behind the visitor was none other than the
king’s messenger. ‘Come quickly!’ the messenger shouted. ‘The queen has
been bitten by a mosquito!’
‘Water!’ the old man repeated.
‘The queen is unwell!’ the messenger shouted again.
Ravi looked from one to the other. One was a grubby old man who may or
may not be the same person who gave him the pitcher. On the other side a
messenger from the king himself! He pictured the gold coins showering down
on him once his healing water soothed the queen’s mosquito bites. The choice
was clear.
He picked up his pitcher and said to the stranger, ‘Wait right here, Uncle,
I’ll be back soon.’
The king’s swift-footed horses took him to the palace. There he rushed to
the queen who was staring in dismay at the mosquito bites on her arm. He

tilted the pitcher to pour some water into a tumbler, but nothing came! Again
and again he tilted the pitcher. He turned it upside down and stared into its
depths. It was dry as a bone.
‘You cheat!’ the king roared. ‘So this is how you have been fooling the
people of my kingdom! Get out, and never let me hear that you have acquired
magical healing powers. If you claim such a thing again I will banish you
forever from the village.’ Then he turned to comfort his queen who was
splashing tears on the bump on her arm.
Ravi slowly walked back to his village. He went to his shop. No one was
there. He searched for the old man who had asked for water. He was nowhere
to be seen. He called out, ‘Uncle, I am sorry. I made a mistake. Please do
come. I will give you water.’ But there was no reply. Now he realized this was
the same old man whom he met a year back.
He remembered the people he had healed once out of kindness and
compassion and how much they had blessed and loved him in return. He
remembered their little acts of generosity, sparing him a few coins, a bundle
of vegetables from their garden in return for the water. When did he become
so selfish and greedy that he would neglect the people who had needed him
the most? The old man had taken back his powers when he sensed Ravi had
misused the gift.
Never mind, Ravi smiled to himself. He would use the money he had
received for the water to help bring a real doctor to the village, someone who
would help the people with his knowledge of medicines and diseases, so that
they need not wait for a magician to cure them of their illnesses.
From that day onwards Ravi filled his pitcher with ordinary water from the
stream and carried it back carefully to his little store and waited for the old
man. Maybe one day he would be back, but till then, Ravi was determined to
bring a real medicine man to his village.

Ajji finished her story and looked around at the four little faces around her.
Raghu was deep in thought. Ajji smiled at him. Then the children shouted,
‘Ajji, tell one more story!’
‘Ah ha,’ Ajji said, ‘too many stories a day are not good either. One laddoo is
very sweet, very delicious but if you eat laddoos all the time it’s no fun. Go

and play outside. Tomorrow I will tell you another story.’ With that she got up
and went to the kitchen to supervise the dinner.

Kavery and the Thief

The children had gone with their Ajja to the paddy fields that morning. They
were all city kids and did not know a thing about farming! On the way, Anand
was surprised to see a bird’s nest on top of the tree. He said to Ajja, ‘I wonder
how birds decide where and how to make their nests!’ Ajja said, ‘The straw in
the nest is from the paddy field. Do you know, farming helps human beings as
well as birds?’ Krishna replied, ‘Ajja, I thought wheat and rice can be just
plucked from trees, like mangoes. But today I realized there is so much work
in farming.’
That afternoon, after lunch, when they gathered around Ajji for the day’s
story, she looked sharply at the children. They had enjoyed learning about
farming activities like cleaning seeds and separating the straw from paddy. In
the city everything came from the supermarket, but here they had seen how
things were really produced.
Ajji said, ‘Farming is very important. If farmers do not grow any food,
what will we all eat?’
Anand said thoughtfully, ‘If farmers do such important work, why are they
so poor?’
‘That’s true, my dear,’ Ajji sighed, fanning herself. ‘Of course there are rich
farmers too, people who own lots of land. But many in our country till small
pieces of land, and so make less money.’
Then seeing the kids’ crestfallen faces, she put down her fan, sat up and
said, ‘But I can tell you of a poor farmer woman who did not remain very
poor. All due to her sharp wit!’

‘Tell Ajji! Do tell!’ the kids yelled. So Ajji started her story.

Kavery’s lazy husband annoyed her no end. There she was working like a
donkey in the fields, ploughing and watering and tending a hard, dry piece of
land, while her husband snored away happily at home! Why, once when a
stranger came asking for some food and water, he just pointed towards the
kitchen and went back to sleep. The stranger, thankfully, was an honest man
and took only enough for himself and his horse. Not that there was much to
steal in Kavery’s little house. They were poor farmers with only a patch of
land where nothing seemed to grow. Somehow Kavery tilled the land, did
some odd jobs in the neighbourhood, and made ends meet.
The land was right next to a temple. On some days her husband would
come along with her on the pretext of helping her, but no sooner would her
back be turned than she would find him stretched out near the temple
courtyard gossiping with passing villagers.
One day, as she was working in the field, trying to dig up the ground so she
could sow some seeds, a thin man with a big moustache appeared beside her.
He was a thief, and up to no good. Kavery, of course, did not know this. She
greeted him politely and went back to her work. Now the thief wanted to steal
the coins that were given as offerings in the temple and perhaps even the
ornaments on the idol. The only way into the temple was by digging his way
in from Kavery’s land. But how could he do anything there, with this tough,
no-nonsense woman working away?
Guessing Kavery was hard up for money, he whispered to her, ‘Sister, why
are you working so hard on this barren land? I will give you one thousand
rupees, sell it to me.’
Kavery raised her eyebrows; why did he want to buy the land for so much
money? Surely something was wrong . . .
The thief sensed she was not about to sell it to him, so he raised his price:
‘A thousand and fifty? No? Two thousand? No again? FIVE THOUSAND?
No?’
Kavery kept shaking her head. She did not like this odd-looking man who
was offering her so much money for the field. Clearly he had some evil plans.
Finally, to keep him quiet, she made up a story. ‘I will never sell this land.
You see, it belonged to my ancestors. Now we are poor, but I am told that
once our family was very rich. Though we lost a lot of our money, much of it

was also buried here, in this field by one ancestor, to keep it safe from
robbers. Then people forgot about it for years and years. My husband found a
clue to the location of the hidden treasure just a few days back. Why do you
think I am digging this hard earth? Not to sow seeds, oh no, that’s just what
everyone thinks. I am actually looking for hidden treasure!’
The thief was stunned. He felt this woman was really innocent, giving such
important information to a stranger. He thought, why should I not take
advantage of this situation? Here he was, hoping to steal a few coins from the
temple, and this woman was telling him about hidden treasure! He replied in a
very humble way, ‘Yes sister, I understand; after all it is your family treasure.
Only you should get it.’ He pretended to walk away, and went and hid himself
a little way down the road.
Night fell; Kavery packed up her tools and headed home. The temple, too,
emptied out and the priest locked it up for the night. Then at midnight, when
all was quiet and the night creatures were coming out of their homes, the thief
crept into the field.
All night he dug and dug, looking for treasure, but of course there was no
sign of it as there never had been any treasure to begin with! By the time
dawn broke he realized Kavery had made a fool of him and all he could do
now was get away from the field fast.
When Kavery reached the field she grinned to herself. Just as she had
expected, the thief had spent the night digging up the land nicely for her. All
she needed to do now was sow the seeds. She worked hard in the field for the
next few months and managed to grow a good crop. She sold those and finally
they had some money. With a part of this money Kavery bought some
jewellery.

Many months later, the thief decided to show his face in the village again.
He was careful to disguise himself, though. He trimmed his long moustaches,
tied a colourful turban and pretended to be a travelling salesman. No sooner
had he stepped into the village than he saw Kavery going about her work. But
what is this . . . Instead of the simple, unadorned lady he saw last year, she
was now wearing jewellery which looked as though it had been in the family
for years! Surely she must have located that missing treasure finally! He was
determined to look in her house and find the rest of her money and treasure.
That night, he appeared at Kavery’s house and said to her husband, ‘I am a
traveller and don’t have a place to spend the night. Please give me shelter for
the night.’
Kavery’s husband agreed immediately. Kavery, however, glimpsed the man
from inside the house and saw through his disguise. She knew he must be
planning some robbery, so she said in a loud voice, making sure the visitor
heard her, ‘Oh dear, your dear aunt is all alone at night and has asked us to
come stay with her. You know how the dark scares her when your uncle is not
there. Come, let us go there for the night.’ Then lowering her voice a bit, yet
making sure she was heard clearly, she continued, ‘Don’t worry about the
jewels. I have hidden them in little holes in the house walls. No one will
suspect the hiding spot.’ Then she came out and in her normal voice told the
thief, ‘Brother, you can sleep in the veranda. The house will be locked. Here
is some food and water for you. We will come tomorrow morning.’ The thief
smiled to himself at Kavery’s foolishness.
Her husband, meanwhile, stared at her with an open mouth, wondering
which aunt and what jewels she was talking about. When she firmly walked
off, he followed obediently.
The thief could not believe his luck. He had the entire night to comb
through the house, tap all the walls and look for the hidden stash of gold
ornaments. So he started. Tap tap tap. Kick, punch and shove. He prowled and
he tapped, he kicked and he pushed the walls, hoping to spot the jewels.
Finally he tore down all the walls. But, of course, there was nothing he could
find. Exhausted he fell asleep and woke only with the crowing of the cock as
the sun rose. Quickly he found his little bundle of things and ran off. Within
minutes Kavery and her husband returned.
‘Oh Kavery, see what the bad man has done to our house! You gave him
food and shelter and made me come with you leaving the man alone in the
night,’ her husband wailed. But Kavery was smiling! Then she broke into

peals of laughter and said, ‘Don’t worry. I had planned this all along. You see,
I saved money from our last crop to rebuild the house. I needed to call in
some labourers to help tear it down, but our guest has done it for us! Now we
can make a larger house for ourselves, just the way we always wanted.’
The whole village heard the story and started marvelling at her intelligence.
Many months flew by. The thief was burning to take revenge. How dare that
village woman trick him, that too not once but twice! He realized that she was
very clever.
One day, he dressed up as a bangle seller and started wandering in the
village. Kavery spotted him and knew who he was at once. She said to her
friends who were crowding around the bangle seller, ‘Oh dear, I would have
loved to get some for myself. But ever since that good-for-nothing thief tried
to steal all our money by tearing down our house, I have hidden everything in
a little hole in a tree in the woods.’
‘Which tree?’ her friends asked.
‘Oh no, I am not saying which tree, but it is at last safe and sound out in the
forest.’
The thief looked at her. Yes Kavery was wearing an ordinary sari with no
ornaments at all.
Her friends turned around in astonishment at the crash with which the
bangle seller flung down his collection of bangles and made off for the forest.
Only Kavery watched with a grin on her face.
Out in the forest, the thief searched high and low for the jewels. He
climbed trees, poked around in bushes, got bitten, scratched and growled at,
but he would not give up. The jewels were there somewhere and he had to
find them.
So that is where we will leave him, prowling around in the forest, looking
for money and gold that don’t belong to him. Everyone praised Kavery for
her quick wit in ridding the village of the thief. She continued to work hard
and made more money from her farming and became a rich old lady. Even her
husband was shamed into giving up his lazy ways and helping her. As for the
thief, who knows, perhaps he is still in that forest, looking for what was never
his. Now if only he had learnt to work hard like Kavery—he would have been
as rich!

The children laughed and laughed when the story was over. ‘The poor thief!’
Meenu and Krishna giggled. ‘Maybe he got eaten by a tiger!’
Ajji grinned. ‘See,’ she told Anand, ‘sometimes with a bit of luck and lots
of pluck, people can change any situation in which they find themselves!’

Who Was the Happiest of Them All?

Meenu was upset. She pouted and sulked and would not talk to Ajji. But
how can any child be angry with Ajji for very long? Their grandmother was
just too loving and affectionate for anyone to not tell her what was wrong.
‘Ajji, it’s been three days, and you have not told a story about a king yet!’
Meenu grumbled.
Ajji nodded. ‘It’s true, Meenu. That was my fault; I should have told you a
story about a king right away!’
‘And I want a good, nice king, who does good, nice things for his people—
not horrible things like punishing them and jailing them,’ Meenu sat straight
and demanded.
‘All right, dear. Here’s a king, just as you wanted . . .’
And Ajji began her story.

King Amrit loved his people and looked after the affairs of his kingdom well.
His minister, Chandan, was a wise man who helped the king in his work
tirelessly.
One day, King Amrit and Chandan were taking a walk on the terrace of the
palace. The terrace offered beautiful views of the surroundings, and they
could see far into the distance. They spotted the weekly market from up there,
with people in colourful clothes buying and selling all kinds of things. There
was plenty to buy and people had money to buy, too. There were no poor
people to be seen anywhere. The king watched with a smile on his face. He

was delighted to see the prosperity of his kingdom. Like any good ruler he
was happy when his people were happy.
He turned to Chandan and said, ‘See how contented my people are. But I
want to check this first-hand by talking to them. Tomorrow, summon people
from all walks of life to the court, and I will ask them myself how they are
doing.’ Chandan was used to the king’s strange requests, so he nodded and
went off to carry out this order.
The next day, the king arrived in court humming a happy tune to himself.
Seeing all the people gathered there waiting for him, he was even more
pleased. He cleared his throat and said in a loud voice, ‘I have called you here
to ask you a very important question. As your king, I need to know if all of
you are contented. Do you have enough for your needs? Do you know anyone
who is not happy about anything?’
The citizens looked at each other, thought for a while and slowly one by
one they came forward to answer. One after the other they all said how happy
they were—their kitchens had enough food, their trades and businesses were
doing well, the king had made them feel safe. The farmers had grown good
crops and the rivers and ponds were full of fish. What more could they ask
for?
The king became more and more pleased as he heard this. Only Chandan,
his minister, watched and heard everything with a frown on his face. Why?
What was wrong? Soon he walked up to the king and whispered something in
his ear. King Amrit’s eyebrows rose up in astonishment. Surely, Chandan
could not be serious! But he looked at the minister’s face and found no trace
of this being a joke.
He turned back to the court and made a most unusual announcement. ‘I am
delighted that all of you have said you are happy. But I want to test this.
Tomorrow, I want all the happy people of this kingdom to come and meet me
in the royal gardens. But I have a condition. All of you will have to enter the
garden from the main gate, walk across and meet me by the gate at the rear of
the garden. I will wait for you there. When you enter the garden you will be
given a sack each and you can pick whatever fruits or flowers your heart
desires.’
An excited buzz broke out among the crowd. It sounded like a lot of fun.
No one was usually allowed to enter the king’s special garden. He had planted
trees from all over the world in that garden and it was said to be filled with all
kinds of beautiful and strange plants.

Right on time the next day, everyone gathered at the gate of the garden. At
the time the king had told them, the guards opened the gates and handed out
the sacks. Men, women and children started roaming around the beautiful
garden. They spotted juicy apples and plump mangoes hanging from trees.
They picked these till they saw ripe pomegranates bursting with juice, grapes
and colourful flowers no one had seen before. People went about picking
whatever they wished for and filling their sacks with them.
But as they walked further into the garden it became wilder, more like a
forest, and there they saw trees laden with apples of gold, mangoes of silver
and flowers studded with gems and jewels!
Everyone emptied their sacks of the fruits they had collected earlier and
started madly filling them up with these precious fruits and flowers. They all
forgot that they had said they had more than enough for their needs at home.
Greed took over, their minds and all they could think about was adding more
and more valuables to their sacks. The fruits which they had picked earlier,
and had tasted to be as sweet as nectar, now lay in heaps around the garden—
forgotten and left to rot.
Then with their sacks filled right to the top, the citizens made their way to
the rear gate of the garden where the king was waiting. But what was this? To
their astonishment they found a raging stream stopping their way. Water
gushed down from behind some rocks and rushed over pebbles and big
boulders through the garden. The stream was narrow, but the current was
strong. There were no boats to take the people across. Clearly, the only way
was to swim. But how could they swim with such heavy sacks filled with gold
and silver fruits?

The people stood by the stream for a long time scratching their heads. Then
one young man did what they all knew needed to be done. He simply
abandoned his sack by the stream, waded into the water, then swam across to
the other side. Slowly the others, too, followed suit. Sadly, some wailing in
distress, they left their sacks filled with what they had thought was the riches
of a lifetime, and dived into the stream. Then they walked up to their king—
wet, unhappy and angry.
King Amrit and Chandan watched them trudge up in their soaking clothes.
Chandan had a small smile on his lips, while the king looked sad. When they
had assembled in front of him, he said, ‘When I asked you yesterday if you
were happy with your lives, all of you said you were contented and did not
need anything more. Yet, today I can see the sadness in your faces when you
had to leave behind the riches you had gathered in my garden. If you were
really happy with your lives, why did you gather the jewel fruits, and why are
you so sad now?’
Everyone looked down, ashamed at their behaviour. Only the young man
who was the first to cross the stream after leaving his sack behind seemed to
be unconcerned. Chandan spotted his cheerful face in the crowd and
beckoned him forward. Then he asked, ‘Tell me, are you not sad you had to
leave behind so much of wealth that suddenly came your way?’
The man said, ‘I didn’t pick the jewelled fruits and flowers. I had picked
some of the lovely, tasty fruits and had eaten my fill of them. In my sack I had
kept some others for my little daughter who is at home. I had thought she
would enjoy these tasty apples and mangoes. But when I saw there was no
other way to go across the stream, I did not think twice about leaving my sack
by the river. My little girl can get tasty fruits from some other garden, too!
But I am so happy the king let us all wander around his garden, looking at the
trees and plants and animals. He is a great king for having created this place
of beauty, and it was a pleasure walking around there.’
Finally a smile appeared on King Amrit’s face. Chandan turned to him and
said, ‘Your Majesty, I hope you now realize that people’s contentment does
not end with having enough food or money. They also need to be truly happy
inside. Only then will they not be swayed when they gain or lose wealth. That
is a lesson that everyone—whether a king or a commoner—needs to
remember.’
The king nodded, as did his subjects. This was a lesson they would not
forget in a hurry!

‘Did you like the story, Meenu?’ Raghu asked.
‘Oh yes,’ Meenu nodded. ‘But I liked the minister more than the king!’
‘That’s true, Meenu,’ Ajji agreed. ‘Kings did need intelligent ministers to
show them the right path sometimes. Remember Akbar had Birbal, and
Krishnadevaraya had Tenali Rama? Why just kings, we all need someone to
tell us if what we are doing is wrong. It could be our parents, grandparents,
teachers or even our best friend. The important thing is to listen to them and
change our ways when needed.’

The Enchanted Scorpions

What an exciting morning the children had had that day! Ajja had asked for
their help in cleaning up his old storeroom. Ajja loved to keep all kinds of old
things in that room, much to Ajji’s annoyance. She firmly believed the room
was the principle attraction for all the cockroaches, mice, termites and other
such bugs in the house. Every summer holiday the children spent a day
clearing out the room, exclaiming over all the treasures they had unearthed.
Ajja even let them keep some of the odds and ends they found. That didn’t
please their mothers too much though!
Today they had found an old wooden box. It was a big box, beautifully
carved all over with flowers, and vines and leaves. Inside, it had little
compartments to keep all manner of things. Now these compartments were
empty, but Raghu, who had been reading Treasure Island, imagined that once
these were full of gold and silver coins, gems as big as eggs and all kinds of
fantastic jewels.
After examining the box thoroughly, the children decided that the day’s
story had to be about lost treasure. Ajji, who knew a story about anything
under the sun, started right away.

Siddharth was a young, good-natured merchant. Looking for work, he arrived
in a village. He liked the people of the village so much that he decided to use
all his savings, buy a house and live there forever. While searching for a
house, he met Uday.

Uday was a poor man. His family had once been extremely wealthy
landowners but were now not so well off. Uday was looking to sell his old
family mansion in order to pay off his family’s loans.
Siddharth loved the house Uday showed him and bought it immediately.
Then he set about repairing the mansion, which was in ruins. As he dug out
the old flooring, he found a sealed box buried underground. When he opened
it, to his surprise, he saw it was filled with scorpions. He flung the box away
in fright.

That evening, he went to visit the wisest man in the village and asked him
about the box of scorpions. The wise man thought for a while, then said,
‘Perhaps Uday’s ancestors hid some money in that box and buried it, to be
used when someone in the family needed the money. Over the years they
must have forgotten about the existence of the box.’
Siddharth was still puzzled. ‘But the box contained scorpions,’ he said, ‘not
money.’
The old man smiled. ‘The box is protected by an old spell. If it is opened
by anyone other than a family member, it will appear as if it is swarming with
scorpions. Only a true family member will be able to see that the box contains
money.’
Siddharth was sad to hear this story. He remembered the tears that had
sprung up in Uday’s eyes as he had looked back at his ancestral house for one
last time before leaving the village. If only he had known about the hidden
treasure, he would not have had to sell the house. When Siddharth reached
home, he decided to keep the box safely till someone from Uday’s family
came to claim it. To make sure that the box was taken only by a true
descendant of Uday’s family, he took four scorpions from the box and hung
them in four corners of his newly opened shop.
All his customers would comment when they entered the shop. ‘Siddharth,
are you mad? Why have you hung dangerous insects in your shop? Do you
want to scare away shoppers?’
Siddharth would only smile. He knew his goods were the best for miles
around, and people would come to shop at his store, scorpions or not.
Gradually the shop came to be known as the Scorpion Shop and the villagers
laughed at him behind his back. But Siddharth did not care.
Many years passed. Siddharth was now a middle-aged man with a wife and
children and enough money. But he had one regret. No one had come to claim
that box.
One day, a young boy walked into the shop and said, ‘Sir, I have heard
from many people in the village that you are wealthy and often help those in
need. I had to stop going to school because I could no longer pay my fees.
Could you please lend me some money so I can finish my studies?’
Siddharth shook his head sadly. ‘The villagers have exaggerated about my
wealth,’ he said. ‘Yes, I am earning enough, but not so much that I can help
you or lend you money, though I would have loved to do so.’

The boy flared up in anger when he heard this. ‘Sir, if you do not want to
help me, please say so openly. Why do you lie? You have so much money that
you don’t know what to do with it. Why else have you hung gold coins in the
four corners of your shop? Surely you can spare some coins to help a poor
student like me.’
Siddharth stared at him in astonishment. ‘Wh-what? What did you just
say?’ he asked, his eyes bulging in excitement.
‘I said if you don’t want to help . . .’ the boy repeated.
‘Yes, yes, I heard that,’ Siddharth cut him short. ‘But what did you say after
that, about the gold coins in my shop?’
The boy now looked at Siddharth doubtfully, afraid that perhaps this
excited old man was a bit mad. ‘I said you are so wealthy that you have hung
gold coins in the four corners of the shop. There they are, for the world to
see!’ And the boy pointed to what appeared to Siddharth as four writhing
scorpions.
Siddharth gave a happy whoop of laughter. He rushed forward and hugged
the boy.
‘Are you related to Uday Kamalakar? Did your family ever live in this
village?’ he nearly shouted into the boy’s ears.
The young man stepped back in alarm. Perhaps this rich man was mad and
dangerous after all. ‘Y-yes, my name is Uday. I was named after my
grandfather. His family lived here for many generations. Then, when they fell
on hard times, my grandfather sold his old house and moved. He never
recovered from the grief of having to sell his ancestral property and died
heartbroken.’
Siddharth wiped away the tears from his eyes. ‘Wait here, my son,’ he said.
Rushing to his house, he came back with the old box and gave it to the young
boy. ‘Go on, open it and tell me what you see,’ he chuckled.
The boy opened the box and his eyes nearly fell out of his head. For he held
in his hands more treasure than he could dream about in his wildest fantasies.
The box was filled with gold and silver coins and jewels!
He looked up in astonishment at Siddharth, who was grinning broadly.
‘Yes, it belongs to you,’ Siddharth explained. ‘I have held it safe for many
years, hoping someone from Uday’s family will come to claim it. Your
troubles are now over. Go home, use the wealth of your ancestors judiciously
and do well in life.’

Then he told the boy the story of how he had found the box which appeared
to be filled with scorpions to anyone who did not belong to Uday’s family.
Uday was amazed when he heard the story. He offered Siddharth half his
wealth in gratitude. But Siddharth would hear none of it. ‘This is yours,’ he
insisted. ‘Go, enjoy your life.’
Uday went away with the box, and all his life he remembered the funny,
honest old man who had kept his wealth safely for him.

‘How lovely, Ajji!’ Krishna gasped. ‘If only we had such a shopkeeper in this
town!’ All the children agreed that that would have been such fun. Ajji
laughed at their dreamy faces. Then she shooed them out to play in the
garden. And do you know what they played till late in the evening? Treasure
hunt, of course!

The Horse Trap

The next day, there was a surprise summer shower. The land smelled
beautiful. The thirsty earth had soaked in every drop of rainwater. The
children had been very busy shifting the puppies and kittens, who were
roaming in the back and front yards, into the house so that they did not get
drenched in the rain. Their respective mothers were very busy shifting the
pappadams left to dry on the terrace. Summer is the season when, under Ajji’s
leadership, pickles and pappadams were made.
Meenu started a calculation. ‘Everyone needs at least five pappadams per
day. For the next one month 600 pappadams will be needed. Tomorrow our
neighbour Vishnu Kaka’s three grandchildren are coming. They will also eat
with us these tasty pappadams. We may have to keep five per head . . . That
means Ajji has to prepare 600 + 50 pappadams.’ When Ajji listened to
Meenu’s mathematics, she laughed and said, ‘Don’t calculate that way. It may
be true today that we will all eat five pappadams a day, but this may not be
true for every day. After eating pappadams for three days, one may get bored.
There is a wedding in my brother’s house and we all might go there. So we
may not eat any pappadam those days. The way you are calculating, reminds
me of the man who calculated the number of horses, once in England . . .’
All the children immediately gathered around her. ‘Oh Ajji, you must tell
us this story of how the horses were counted.’
So Ajji had to stop what she was doing right there and tell them the story.

Many many years ago, in England, there lived a great thinker and scholar
called George Smith. He thought a lot about how it would be in the future,
and advised the prime minister about many things. He researched how many
people would live in the country in twenty years’ time, he calculated how
many schools, hospitals and roads needed to be built, or how much food
needed to be grown or bought from other places to feed all these people.
His calculations helped the government immensely in planning for the
future.
George often needed to visit the prime minister’s office to talk to him about
some new project and advise him. One day, the prime minister had invited
him for a meeting, so he hopped into his horse carriage and set off for the
office. Now George was always deep in thought and rarely noticed what was
happening around him. Today, too, he sat in his carriage thinking about farms
and ships and houses. But suddenly his carriage stopped with a jolt and he
was shaken out of his thoughts. There was some commotion on the road and
all carriages had stopped around him. Normally George would have just sunk
back into his thoughts again, but today something stopped him. A horrible,
strong smell. A smell that hung in the air and made you cover your nose with
a hanky if you were not a scholar wrapped up in your own world.
Today, somehow, George was not able to disconnect himself from what was
going on around him. The smell kept wafting into his nose and taking his
mind away from the problem he was tackling. He called out to his coachman,
‘Hi John, what is this extraordinary smell?’
John the coachman was used to his master’s absent-minded ways, and he
replied briefly, ‘Horse dung.’
Horse dung! Now that was something George had never given a thought to.
Somehow, he could now think of nothing else. Soon his carriage pulled up in
front of the prime minister’s office. But George kept sitting inside, lost in
thought. Finally John tapped on the window to tell his master that they had
reached their destination.
George walked to the visitor’s room still thinking. He was sitting there,
reflecting on horses and their dung, when the prime minister’s secretary came
to meet him. Now Adam, the secretary, was not as learned as George, but he
was very sharp and intelligent. He greeted George and said to him
apologetically, ‘The PM had to make time for another important meeting, and
will be late in seeing you. I hope you don’t mind waiting.’

George kept staring out of the window, watching yet more horse-drawn
carriages rushing up and down the road. Thinking he had perhaps not heard
him, Adam cleared his throat and repeated loudly, ‘Mr Smith, the PM . . .’
‘Yes, I heard you, Adam,’ George mumbled.
Worried that this great thinker of the country was in some trouble, Adam
asked gingerly, ‘Is something bothering you? Perhaps I could help . . .?’
George looked at him excitedly, ‘You know, I just looked into the future
and realized we will all die in about a hundred years. Our country will be
destroyed, our way of life gone forever. And do you know why? All because
of horses . . . and their dung!’
Adam stared at George, puzzled. Surely he could not be serious?
George continued, ‘See, now we use horses as the principal mode of
transport in the country. They are used to draw carriages, in the king’s stables,
even in the farms.’
Adam nodded. This was true.
‘So how many horses are there now? Let’s assume that there are 500 rich
families who can afford to own a horse carriage. If each family has at least
two children and all of them are rich enough to own carriages, that will mean
a minimum of two more carriages in a few years. Each carriage would require
two horses. So, each rich family would be using four horses at the least. So
then there will be 2,000 horses. If you add our king’s cavalry, and the number
of horses in the farms, the numbers increase substantially.’
Adam nodded. Yes, this sounded true enough, but what was George’s
point?
‘How do we get rid of the dung they generate now?’
Adam answered patiently, ‘We dig pits and empty the dung into them.’
George nodded, ‘Now that’s my point. Imagine the scene a hundred years
from now. 2,000 horses would have increased to 400,000, given the way the
population is increasing. This will mean more dung! And what will we do
with all this dung? Humans will need more space and houses and farming to
sustain themselves. Where will we find open land to dig up and bury the
dung? It will lie unattended everywhere and cause horrible diseases. If they
make their way into the water sources it will be even worse. We will end up
poisoning ourselves and our environment. We will become sick, and our
country will become poor just by tending to so many sick people, and finally
our way of life will just die out—as we all will. All because of horses!’

Adam sat and thought about this for some time. George’s thoughts and the
grim picture he had painted of the future was scary indeed. But . . . here
Adam’s practical thinking kicked in; what if things did not work exactly the
way George was seeing it? He turned to his friend and said, ‘Mr Smith, you
are not taking into account one very important bit into your calculations—the
ability humans have to innovate and adapt. Many years ago there were no
carts or carriages, we went everywhere by foot. Then once we started
domesticating animals we realized we could use them for transport too. But
do you think humans will rest with this achievement? Who knows, in a
hundred years what other modes of transport we would have invented so that
we may not require horse for transport at all. Perhaps we will even be able to
fly like birds!’
George never solved this problem in his lifetime. Neither did Adam live to
see how true his thoughts about the future had been. Man went on to invent so
many new ways of moving from place to place that horses are no longer used
in the numbers they once were. James Watt invented the steam engine, which
led to the invention of railways. Then cars were invented by Karl F. Benz and
became widely used in cities for transport. Finally the Wright brothers
showed that humans could fly—in aeroplanes! With all these great inventions,
the horse and other animal-drawn carts and carriages are now a thing of the
past.
Truly, if man did not innovate and experiment, our species would have died
out—just like George had predicted!

Everyone was very happy this story. They all teased Meenu. ‘You are the
George Smith of our house. Who knows one day nobody will eat pappadams
and Amma may not prepare that many pappadams. We may even buy directly
from the shops if it is a small number.’
Meenu felt very embarrassed. She hid her face with a pillow. Ajji said,
‘Don’t make fun of her. Foresight is very important. If you don’t have
foresight, then you will land up in trouble like Ramu.’
‘Who is Ramu?’ the children immediately asked Ajji.
‘I will tell the story of Ramu only tomorrow.’ And Ajji bustled off. The
children knew she would tell only one story a day, so they eagerly waited for
the next day to hear Ramu’s story.

A Treasure for Ramu

Vishnu Kaka’s grandchildren had come to visit him. Vishnu Kaka was a very
good friend of Ajja’s. They had lived next door to each other for years.
Unfortunately, his wife Vasanthi Kaki had died a few years back. Though
there was a cook, his grandchildren—Sharan, Suma and Divya—always
preferred to eat in Ajji’s house, which Ajji also welcomed.
With seven hungry children to feed, Ajji realized telling a story would be a
good way to keep them quiet till the food got cooked. Ajji started the story
while peeling the cucumbers.

Did you know that sometimes even the gods in heaven can get into an
argument? That’s what happened once when Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth,
found herself cornered by all the other gods. Together, they accused her of
one thing—that she never stayed in one place for too long! ‘No sooner are
you comfortably settled in one house, do you decide to leave it, and off you
go elsewhere!’ they said to her.
Lakshmi sniffed and said, ‘That’s not true. I stay in a house as long as I am
welcome. If people think ahead, work sincerely and spend money wisely, I
stay with them forever. Unfortunately often when I am in one place for a
while, people behave strangely, and I have no choice but to leave.’
The other gods pooh-poohed this and refused to believe her. Poor Lakshmi
decided she needed to show them proof of what she had just said. Here is
what she did to show that she was correct. Remember, many human years

make only a second in god years. So what took years to happen on earth, the
gods could see in only a few minutes.

Ramu and Rani were farmers. They worked hard in their fields and earned
enough money to feed their children and meet their other needs. They were
not rich and sometimes had to make do with fewer new clothes and not very
nice food.
One day, Rani was digging a corner of her garden in order to plant a tree.
As she dug deeper, there was a loud clang! Her shovel had hit something
metallic hidden underground. Excited, she dug faster, till she pulled out a
large metal box. When she opened it she could not believe her eyes. It was
filled with gold and silver jewels! For a while Rani stood dumbstruck. Then
she did a happy whoop and ran home with the box under her arm.
‘Ramu, Ramu, see what I found buried in our garden!’ she yelled.
Ramu was writing up the accounts for the month, and for a while paid no
attention to his wife. Only when she came up to him and did a happy jig
around him did he look up. Imagine how his mouth fell open in surprise when
he saw the box of jewels.

Soon Ramu and Rani were the richest people in the village. They stopped
going to work—after all, what was the need, they told each other. Why work
in the hot sun when they had piles of money at home? They left their small
cottage and moved into the biggest house in the village. They had servants
who worked day and night doing every small job, so the two did not need to
lift even a finger. There was a cook who cooked delicious meals, a person to
serve it, another just to clean shoes and one person to even fan Ramu as he sat
on his bed the whole day and gossiped with his newfound friends.
Then Ramu decided village life was too boring and they moved to the big
city. There they had another big house, more servants and lots of fun at
various parties. Slowly they forgot the good things that had once made them a
well-loved family. They forgot to work hard, to help others in their need, or to
just be nice people. They thought that with money they could buy anything,
including respect. They behaved rudely to others. They spent more and more
money on clothes and parties, and as they did no work at all, the money
started dwindling. They started borrowing from others which they soon could
not pay back.
One day, Ramu looked sadly at his account book. It was now filled with
numbers that showed he only needed to pay others; there was hardly anything
left for himself. In a heavy voice he called out to his wife, ‘Rani dear, the
good days are over. I think we forgot to be the kind of people Goddess
Lakshmi likes. She has gone elsewhere, and we are left with nothing.’
Rani stood silently for a while, then replied, ‘Never mind, Ramu. We have
learnt our lesson. I now think of the days when I would work all day long and
go to sleep a tired person and sleep soundly. I would fall into a deep slumber
as soon as I Iay down on the bed. Now I lie awake all night, wondering which
sari to wear the next day and what to do with our money. I am too fat to even
dig, like I did when I found the treasure!’
Ramu smiled and hugged his wife. ‘We’ll go back to our village, and to our
old ways. We will work hard like we did once, and we will help everyone
around us. Maybe that will make Lakshmi come back to us one day. And even
if she doesn’t, we will try and be happy with what we have.’
So Ramu and his family went back to their old home. And do you know
what? They did live happily ever after!

The gods watched what was happening with Ramu and Rani from the heavens
as Lakshmi entered and then left their house. They had to agree with her—if
the people of the house she entered became nasty, then what could she do
except leave, and hope they saw the error of their ways?

The Donkey and the Stick

Ajji was on an outing with her daughter and daughter-in-law, Sumati and
Subhadra. One lived in Bangalore and the other in Mumbai. They were
returning the next day as they had used up all the leaves their offices had
given. The children would remain at Shiggaon though, with their
grandparents. Everyone was looking forward to this stage of the holidays. The
children because there would be no parents telling them what to do, to Ajji’s
delicious food and to fun outings with Ajja. The grandparents, too, were
looking forward to having the children to themselves. The rest of the year it
was only the two of them in the house.
As Ajji walked with the two younger women, they talked about how
difficult it was for them to manage their office work and the children. Ajji
listened silently. Then Sumati said, ‘But they are so good when they are with
you, Amma. How do you manage them so well?’ Subhadra nodded. ‘I have
read so many books and articles to find out about this, but nothing works the
way it is written in books.’
Now Ajji said, ‘Do not always go by what you read in books. Learn to use
your life’s experiences, read between the lines.’ Then she grinned and said,
‘Otherwise you will become like the people in the story about the donkey and
the stick!’
Sumati and Subhadra forgot they were at the temple and clamoured
together, ‘What is this story? Tell us!’ Ajji shook her head. ‘Now you are
behaving like children. But you are my children after all. All right, come join
us at night when I tell today’s story.’

That night the two mothers were the first to appear to listen to the stories.
The children were surprised to see their mums, and Ajji started her story.

Aruna Marg was a busy road. It connected a number of villages to each other
and many people, animals and carts used it every day. Walking along that
road, a group of students discovered a rock which no one had bothered to look
at in many years. ‘Look!’ they told each other in excitement, ‘there is
something written on the rock. What can it mean?’
They called out to their teacher. When they examined the rock carefully,
they found the markings were actually little drawings. One showed a stick,
and the other a donkey.
By now a large crowd had gathered. Everyone was puzzled. What could
these strange drawings mean, they asked, scratching their heads. They
decided to go to the ashram of a wise sage nearby and ask him. But when they
trooped into the ashram, they found to their disappointment that the sage had
gone on a long pilgrimage. Only his young disciple was there, looking after
the cows and calves.
They asked the disciple if he could throw some light on the strange
drawings. Now this young man was not very bright. But like many foolish
people he loved to put on an air of learning and pretend to be very clever. He
examined the drawings carefully and minutely. Then he proclaimed, ‘It is
very simple. This is the drawing of a magic stick. The man with the stick is
the hero of this place. He died protecting this village centuries back. Each
person using this road must worship the rock and make an offering to it. The
one who ignores it will become a donkey!’

The villagers were astonished to hear this strange explanation. But they
were devout people and on that very day they set up a shrine around the rock.
They installed the foolish disciple as head priest in charge of taking offerings
from passing travellers. The disciple was pleased with his brainwave. Of
course he did not know what the silly drawings meant, but he no longer had to
run after calves and get kicked by angry cows in the ashram! He could sit by
the rock the whole day, taking his pick of the offerings to the rock and mutter
a few mumbo-jumbo prayers.
His happiness lasted a few months—till the wise old sage returned to the
ashram. The old sage was annoyed to find his disciple missing and his
beloved animals roaming around, uncared for. Then he looked into the
distance and saw a large crowd gathered by the road. He went to investigate,
and found his missing disciple there, looking happy and well fed, busy
accepting offerings for a rock. He stood watching for a while. Then he walked
up to the rock and closely examined the pictures. Without saying a word, he
picked up a stout iron rod and, to the astonishment of the gathered crowd,
started moving the rock. Many came forward to help him and when they had
been able to move the rock, they found a pot of gold under it!
The sage said to the people gathered around him: ‘The pictures meant you
had to move the rock with an iron rod and find the hidden money. If you
didn’t, you were all like donkeys. You should not follow rituals and the words
of others blindly. Think for yourselves and understand why you are doing
what you do. If you had given this some thought, you would have recovered
this treasure many months ago. Instead, you wasted your time and money
making offerings to a rock and helping this greedy disciple of mine become
fat and make fools of you. This treasure belongs to all of us. Let’s use it to
keep this road in good repair so everyone can use it and go about their work
in peace.’
The villagers hung their heads in shame for they realized how foolish they
had been. As for the disciple, he had to clean the cowsheds for many months
to atone for his greed.

‘What’s in It for Me?’

Ajja told Anand, ‘Will you go fetch my clothes from the dhobi?’ Anand was
reading a book, and said without looking up, ‘Then what will you give me?’
Ajja smiled and said, ‘I will give you nothing. Why should I give you
anything? You are a part of the family.’ Anand looked up now. ‘Oh! But that
is not true in our house,’ he declared. ‘Whenever my dad tells me to do some
work, I ask for a reward and he gives it to me.’ Ajja was surprised. ‘Let me
talk to your father. The joy of helping someone itself is a reward. This is not
right.’
‘Dad is a big officer in a bank. Can he make mistakes?’ asked Krishna with
great surprise.
‘He may be an officer in the bank but at home he is your father and my son,
and I will talk to him. If you go on like this you will become like “Mushika”.’
‘What’s a “Mushika”?’ asked Sharan.
Ajja looked around. There was no sign of Ajji. Probably churning out some
last-minute masala powder for the mothers to take back with them. He looked
pleased. ‘Today I will tell you a story. Of a Mushika and what happens if you
want to be paid for every little thing.’

Mushika the mouse walked jauntily down the road, whistling a happy tune to
himself. There had been a storm earlier in the day which had got rid of the
summer heat. He had just eaten a big, juicy mango that had fallen in the
storm, so his tummy was full and he was as pleased as Punch. On the road, he

saw a twig, also fallen from the tree above in the storm. Now a mouse will
store and keep anything, hoping it will be of use one day. So Mushika picked
up the twig in his mouth and set off.
A little ahead he met a potter. The potter was sitting with his head in his
hands. Why? Because his oven had been drenched in the rain and now he did
not have enough dry wood to light it again. How would he bake his pots and
sell them?
As the potter sat wailing in front of his house, Mushika walked up and
watched him for some time. ‘Wossh up, brother?’ he asked with the twig still
clutched in his mouth.
At first the potter paid no attention to the strange talking mouse. Then
when Mushika asked him again and again, he told the little creature why he
was crying. Mushika nodded, kept the twig aside and said, ‘See, this twig has
dried in the wind and can be used to light your kiln. I’ll happily give it you,
Brother Potter, but what’s in it for me?’
The potter thought hard and, deciding that a little mouse could not ask for
much, said, ‘I will give whatever you ask for.’
In a flash Mushika replied, ‘Then give me that large pumpkin that is lying
in the corner of the room.’
The potter was astonished—how can a mouse carry a pumpkin? Besides,
he had been looking forward to the lovely pumpkin curry his wife would
make for him that night. ‘Choose something else, little mouse,’ he urged. But
Mushika was stubborn—the pumpkin for the twig or nothing.
So the potter gave Mushika the pumpkin. The mouse was delighted. He had
made a mighty human do what he wanted! He left the pumpkin near the
potter’s house saying he would collect it soon and set off down the road
again.
Further ahead, a milkman was sitting by his cows, shaking his head.
‘What’s up, Brother Milkman?’ asked a tiny voice. To his astonishment the
man saw a mouse with bright eyes peeping up at him.
Sadly he shook his head some more, then said, ‘The storm scared my cows
and they are refusing to give me milk. What will I sell today and what will my
family eat?’
‘Spicy pumpkin curry—if you want!’
‘Surely you are joking, my friend. I have ten people at home. Where will I
get a pumpkin large enough to feed everyone?’

‘Just walk back the way I came. You will reach a potter’s house. Right
beside that I have left a pumpkin. That’s mine, and you can have it. But
what’s in it for me, Brother?’
The milkman shrugged and said, ‘Whatever you want.’ Like the potter he
thought, what can a mouse want?
Mushika said, ‘Then give me a cow.’
‘Are you mad? A pumpkin for a cow? Whoever has heard such a thing?’
‘It’s that or nothing, my friend,’ replied Mushika firmly. So the milkman
went and got the large pumpkin and gave one cow to the mouse.

A big cow with large horns that listened to what he commanded! Mushika
the mouse could not believe his luck. Off he went, seated on the cow,
whistling another happy tune, when he stopped in front of a marriage hall.
Why were people standing around looking sad and worried? They should be
busy preparing for the marriage feast! Even the bride and groom were
standing, with long faces.
‘What’s up, Brother Groom?’ called Mushika, sitting atop his cow.
The groom replied gloomily, ‘There’s no milk to prepare the wedding
kheer. How will the wedding feast be complete without the dessert?’
Mushika grinned. ‘Worry not. Here, take this cow, she is now happy and
will give you milk. But what’s in it for me, Brother?’
The groom was very happy and said, ‘Why, you can have whatever you
want! You can eat your fill of the feast—sweets, pulao, fruits, whatever your
heart desires.’ The mouse kept quiet and gave the cow to the wedding party.
They milked the cow and had plenty of milk. There was a great wedding
feast. After the party was over, the mouse replied in a flash, ‘Give me your
bride!’
The groom and everyone in the marriage party were astonished at the
mouse’s cheek. The groom was about to give him a good whack, when his
newly wedded bride stopped him. ‘You had given him your word that he
could have whatever he wants. Let me go with him. I’ll teach him such a
lesson that he will never try to carry off another human bride again!’
Her husband agreed, so off she went with the mouse.
Mushika scampered ahead, eager to show the bride his home. But what was
this, why was she walking so slowly?
‘Hurry up, Bride,’ he called. ‘It’s about to rain again.’
The bride replied, ‘I am a human, I can’t run as fast as you.’
So Mushika had to slow down. By the time they reached his home, which
was a little hole under a tree, he was very hungry.
‘Cook me a nice meal with lots of grain,’ he commanded.
The bride nodded and said, ‘Of course, but where is the kitchen, the spices,
the oil and the vessels? I am a human after all. I can’t cook only grains.’
The mouse realized he was in a real fix having got this useless human back
with him. ‘Never mind,’ he sighed. ‘At least come inside the house.’
‘Oh, but how will I do that?’ wailed the bride. ‘I cannot set even a toe
inside that hole, it is so small. Where will I sleep tonight?’

‘Err, how about under that tree?’ Mushika suggested, pointing to another
big tree nearby.
‘No way,’ sniffed the bride. ‘It will rain and I will get wet and I will catch a
cold, then a fever, and I will need a doctor, who will give me bitter medicines
. . .’ Now she started wailing even louder.
‘Shush shush,’ Mushika comforted her, thinking he should have agreed to
eat his fill of the wedding feast instead of bringing this strange whiny woman
back home with him. ‘How about you stay in that temple veranda for the
night?’ he suggested, pointing to a big temple across the road.
‘Oh, but thieves and robbers will come there, and try to snatch away my
lovely jewels,’ cried the woman. Then suddenly she dried her tears and said,
‘What if I call my friends Ram and Shyam to protect me?’
Before Mushika could say anything, she whistled loudly and called, ‘Ramu,
Shyamu!’
From nowhere a big dog and cat appeared next to her and made as if to eat
up Mushika. Oh, how he ran and saved his life by jumping into the safety of
his hole.
The bride grinned and went back to her wedding feast with her faithful
pets. As for Mushika, he had to go to sleep on an empty stomach that night.
‘Tomorrow,’ he sighed, ‘perhaps there will be another storm,’ and went off to
sleep.

The Princess’s New Clothes

After their mothers went back, Ajji took all the children on a shopping spree.
They went to the biggest clothes store in the town. Ajji had filled her purse
with notes and told all the seven children, ‘Each of you can buy one dress. It
is our gift to you. Remember, I have Rs 500 for each of you to buy one dress.’
At the store she chose a nice comfortable chair. The children were allowed
to decide which clothes they wanted and in which colour. They could go into
the trial room and try them out before buying. After an hour, everybody had
whatever they wanted, except Krishna. She had tried on many many dresses
but found fault with all of them. She told Ajii, ‘This store does not have
anything nice for me. Shall we go to another one?’
‘What is wrong with this one? It is a well-known store,’ Ajji remarked. But
Krishna pouted and complained that she already had the colours and cuts
available here, so everyone trooped off to the next shop. There, too, after a lot
of thought, finally, Krishna chose her dress. Ajji had been watching all this
with her typical soft smile. On the way back, as they piled into the taxi, she
whispered to Krishna, ‘It’s good you chose a dress finally. But beware, or else
you may turn out to be like that princess . . .’
‘Which princess, Ajji?’ the children asked.
‘The one in the story.’ Ajji was now looking out of the window.
‘Tell us, oh tell us!’
So Ajji told them the story of the princess who never liked any of her
clothes.

The king and queen of Ullas were very sad. No one was attacking them, the
subjects were happy, the farmers had grown a bumper crop . . . then why were
they so sad? Because they longed for a child and did not have one.
One day, they learnt of a place in the forests in the kingdom, where if you
prayed hard and well, you were granted your wish. They went there and for
many days prayed to the goddess of the forest. Finally their prayers were
heard and the goddess appeared before them and asked what they wished for.
The king and queen bowed low and said, ‘We wish to have a child.’
‘So be it, you will soon have a little girl,’ said the goddess, shimmering in
the greenery. ‘But remember, though she will be a loving child, she will have
one flaw. She will love new clothes too much and it will make life difficult for
you. Do you still want such a child?’
The king and queen wanted a baby so much they would have agreed to
anything. So the goddess granted them their wish and vanished back among
the trees.
Soon, as had been said, the queen gave birth to a lovely baby girl. Oh, what
a beauty the little thing was, with her jet-black hair and thick eyelashes and
long toes and fingers. They named her Beena. The kingdom rejoiced in their
king’s happiness and for a while there was complete joy everywhere.
Beena grew up a child loved by everyone. She became prettier by the day,
and with her charming manners and ready laughter, she filled everyone’s
hearts with joy. But, as the goddess had said, she did have one flaw—she
loved new clothes! She loved clothes so much she had to have a new outfit
every day. She would refuse to wear the same clothes twice! Tailors from all
over the kingdom and even outside created beautiful, extraordinary clothes for
her. Silk, cotton, wool, you name it, and Beena had a dress or sari of that
material. Blues, greens, reds, pinks, every colour in nature was present in her
wardrobe.
For a while the king and queen were happy to let her have new clothes
every day. But soon they realized they were spending all their money and
time in finding new tailors and clothes for their daughter! This had to stop.
They coaxed and cajoled and pleaded and scolded, but Beena remained
unmoved. Her parents understood this was the flaw the goddess had warned
them about, and finally decided to send Beena to the goddess to find a
solution.
Beena entered the dark, green forest and waited for the goddess to appear.
She came in a flash of green light, which lit up everything around her. Folding

her hands, Beena told the goddess why she had come.
‘I know your problem, my child. I will send you a new outfit every day. It
will be unique, its colours and design will delight you. But you should
remember one thing: you cannot wear anything else, or exchange these
clothes with anyone else. If you ever do that, your life will be miserable.’
Happily Beena agreed to this. After all, why would she be unhappy if she
got a new dress every day?
From then on, Beena woke up each morning to find an extraordinary new
sari or dress lying by her bed, ready to be worn. It was a dream come true for
her! She enjoyed herself no end, choosing matching earrings and bangles and
shoes, and everyone kept telling her how pretty she looked.
Yet after some months the excitement died down. No one remarked when
Beena sashayed in wearing another fantastic dress. ‘Oh, it’s the goddess’s
gift,’ they all said. ‘It’s not something you or I can ever have,’ all her friends
said and shrugged and went their way.
Beena grew sad. Then one festival day, while walking near the river, she
noticed a girl wearing a simple cotton sari. There was something about the
way the girl walked and how attractive she looked which made everyone turn
and stare. Beena noticed how the people were admiring the girl. She became
jealous because no one noticed her beautiful clothes any longer, yet they had
such praise for this simply dressed girl. She forgot all about the goddess’s
warning and went up to the girl and said, ‘Will you take my dress and give me
your sari in return? It is so lovely that people can’t take their eyes off it.’

The girl was astonished. The famous Princess Beena was offering to take
her sari, and was giving her a marvellous outfit in exchange! She could not
believe her luck and happily gave her sari to Beena. She then wore Beena’s
dress and went away. No sooner had Beena worn the girl’s sari than there was
a flash and a bang. Her surroundings changed, and she found herself
transported deep inside the forest, in front of the goddess.
‘Beena,’ the goddess called. ‘I had told you that you cannot give away or
exchange the clothes I gave you. But you have done just that! I am afraid
there is a punishment for not listening to me. I will have to take you away
from the world of humans forever.’
Beena looked down in sadness. She thought of her parents’ tear-stained
faces, the grief of the people in her kingdom who had loved her dearly. Then
she spoke aloud, ‘I will go away, but do grant me one last wish. Turn me into
something that will remind everyone about their beloved princess, something
they may even find useful.’
The goddess smiled and turned Beena into a plant. Do you know what plant
Beena became? An onion! Have you noticed how the onion has so many
layers? Those are all the dresses that Beena once wore. And have you noticed
your mother’s eyes water while she cuts onions? That is because unknown to
ourselves, like all the people in Beena’s kingdom, we still shed tears the
beautiful, kind-hearted princess!

After listening to this story, Krishna wailed, ‘Ajji, I don’t want to be like
Beena. I don’t want to get turned into an onion! I promise not to fuss over my
clothes from now on!’

The Story of Paan

Vishnu Kaka had invited the entire family for dinner. It was a lavish meal
with many courses. Everyone ate their fill, enjoying each dish. After it was
over, the children gathered around Kaka as he brought out his big box of
paan. They loved watching Kaka choose and mix his ingredients to make
delicious paans which the grown-ups then ate with blissful looks on their
faces.
He explained to the children, ‘A paan contains betel leaf, betel nut and
lime. But we should use only so much of each ingredient. Only then will it
taste good.’ All seven children wanted to try this experiment on their own.
Some of them chewed on only the leaf, some on the nut, and others on the nut
and leaf, or the leaf and only lime. It was true, when the three were not put
together, the paan tasted horrible! In fact, Sharan vomited when he added
more lime than necessary! Everyone made a beeline for the mirror to check if
their tongues were red or not.
Ajji was sitting and chatting with Sharan’s mom and watching their antics.
Then she called out to them and said, ‘Children, by this time you must all
know that the leaf, nut or lime on their own taste very bad. Even if you put
just two together it is no good. Only when you add the three in a perfect
combination can a paan be eaten. And that’s when you get that red colour in
the mouth!’
‘Why is that, Ajji? Is there any special meaning?’
‘Yes there is a special meaning and I’ll tell you the story, which I first heard
from my grandmother.’

Once upon a time, there were two brothers, Bhanu and Veer. Their parents
died when they were young and Bhanu brought up his younger brother with a
lot of love and care. When Bhanu was old enough, he married Bharati. She
was a gentle, loving person and looked after Veer with as much love as her
husband.
When Veer was about twenty years of age, he heard that their king was
looking for soldiers to join his army, as there was going to be a war. Veer
decided to join the army. Oh, how much his brother and sister-in-law cried
and pleaded, telling him to remain at home with them. They could not bear
the thought of the boy they had brought up with so much affection going so
far away from them. But Veer insisted on becoming a soldier, so they let him
go away, with a heavy heart and tears in their eyes.
For many days there was no news of Veer. The king went to war,
vanquished his enemy and returned. The soldiers who went with him also
came back home. But of Veer there was no sign. Day after day his brother and
sister-in-law watched out for him, hoping to see him come walking down the
road, back home. But there was no one. Then, one day, a group of soldiers
passed through their village, returning home from the war. Bhanu called out
to them and asked about his brother.
‘Veeru, oh yes, so sad, he died, you know, in the battlefield,’ said one,
shaking his head.
‘No no. He was injured, and he recovered. Did he not come home?’ said
another.
‘He was on his way home when he fell ill,’ informed a third.

On hearing these awful tidings, Bhanu was deeply saddened. He decided he
could not live at home waiting for his dear little brother to return. He would
go and look for him. When he told his wife, Bharati too decided to go with
him. Together, they set off one day to look for the missing Veer and bring him
home.
They decided to go to the site of the king’s big battle, where Veer was last
seen by his companions. This place was far away and they had to travel
through forests and valleys and mountains and deserts. The two walked and
walked, over many miles, but poor Bharati was not strong enough. One day,
after travelling through a thick forest, they reached a little hamlet. Bharati sat
down, exhausted. Then to Bhanu’s great horror she died out of sheer
exhaustion. Unable to bear his grief, Bhanu too died immediately.
Over many years at the place where the couple had died, two trees grew.
One was a tall tree and the other a creeper that hugged the tree. It was as if
Bharati and Bhanu were together even in death.
Meanwhile, Veer, the brother they had loved so deeply, was not really dead.
He had got terribly wounded in the war and spent many years recovering from
his injuries in a little village far away from home. When he finally recovered,
he came back as fast as he could to his old house, knowing how anxious his
family would be for him.
But imagine his surprise when he found the house locked and bolted,
abandoned for many years. Slowly the neighbours gathered around and told
him how Bhanu had decided to go looking for his lost brother.
That night Veer cried many bitter tears. How would he find his beloved
brother and sister-in-law now? Where were they? By the time morning
dawned he had made up his mind. He would try and go the way they had
travelled and find them. Immediately he set off.
Veer was a soldier, but he had only lately recovered from many wounds and
was not too strong. It took him many days to walk across the difficult land
Bhanu and his wife had crossed. Then one day, near a forest, he came across a
little shrine. The villagers told him the sad story of how the shrine came to be.
Years ago a couple had arrived at the spot, tired from days of walking. Legend
had it that they were on the way looking for a long-lost brother. When the two
died without fulfilling this wish, two wonderful plants, unknown to anyone
earlier, had grown at the spot. The leaves and nuts from the trees were so
sweet and refreshing that the villagers decided to build a small temple for the
man and the woman at the place.

Veer listened to the story with growing sorrow. He realized the couple they
talked about was none other than his brother and his wife. Unable to bear the
news, he turned into a statue of limestone.
Do you know how they have all been remembered ever since? The tall tree
grew nuts called areca nuts, the creeper’s leaves were paan or betel leaves and
from the statue came the lime paste that is added to preparations of paan. And
this is how this loving family came together even after death. Together they
taught people the values of love, unity and loyalty, and when people chew
paan they remember this story.

Sharan’s mom was surprised to hear this story. ‘Really, Ajji,’ she said, ‘even I
was not aware why these three ingredients are always used to make a paan. I
too will come to listen to your stories from now on!’
Ajji nodded, then she added with that glint in her eyes, ‘Chewing paan is
not good for your teeth. Everyone, off you go to brush your teeth!’

Payasam for a Bear

Ajja and Vishnu Kaka were planning something! They could be spotted
grinning and nodding and whispering. The children were dying to know what
it was. Then one evening, they finally broke the news. They were all going on
a picnic! It would be a picnic at the nearby falls. These waterfalls were really
beautiful, with the river meandering close by and the forest just across. The
children got even more excited when the two grandpas revealed the rest of the
plan. Tomorrow would be a rest day for Ajji and Sharan’s mother, because all
the cooking would be done by them and the children! And they would do it
the traditional way, by gathering firewood and then cooking the meal from
scratch.
The children were so excited they could hardly sleep that night. All they
could talk about was the picnic and what they would cook. Before nodding
off they had decided the menu—pulao and kheer! Payasam or kheer is so easy
to make, and who doesn’t love it?
The next day, even the usual late risers were up and about and ready to set
out for the picnic by seven o’clock. Oh, what a beautiful spot it was! They all
ran around exclaiming over everything and getting ready with their cricket
bats and balls for a game. Ajji sat comfortably under a big tree. Then it was
time to get lunch ready. Everyone started looking for twigs to use as firewood.
Ajji spotted Divya straying towards the dense thicket of trees and called out,
‘Divya, come back, don’t go there. Who knows what animal is there, and on
top of that you all are going to cook payasam . . .’

Minu’s ears pricked up immediately. ‘Why, Ajji, what does payasam have
to do with animals?’
Ajji grinned, ‘But bears love payasam! Don’t you know?’
Everyone declared they had never known this piece of information. So
cooking and games forgotten, young and old gathered around her to hear the
story of a bear who wanted to eat payasam.

Did you know that you must never ever anger a bear? It is true; an angry bear
can do some really awful things, so it is always safer to keep your word to
him. Poor Mohan and Basanti did not know this, and tried to trick a bear, and
see what happened to them!
Mohan had a banana plantation, where he grew delicious bananas. He also
had a huge mango tree that provided him with baskets of juicy mangoes every
summer. He would sell these fruits in the market and lived happily enough
with his wife, Basanti.
Once, his trees yielded an exceptionally large crop of bananas and
mangoes, and he decided to sell them in the market in the city, where he
would get a higher price for them. So off he went with his sacks and baskets
to the city. There he sat in the market, sold everything that he had brought,
and made quite a bit of money. At the market, he ran into an old friend, Amar.
Mohan and Amar were overjoyed to see each other after many years.
‘Come to my house, dear friend,’ insisted Amar. ‘Let us enjoy a good meal
and talk about our childhood days.’
Mohan thought this was a wonderful idea, and went with Amar to his
house. There the two friends ate huge quantities of rice, dal, lovely vegetables
and all kinds of sweets. Then, finally, out came the best part of the meal—the
payasam!
Payasam is known by many names all over India. Some call it kheer, some
payesh, and others, payasam. It is made with milk, rice and jaggery and many
other ingredients, and it is always yummy! So was the payasam that Amar
served his friend. It was made with fragrant rice, creamy milk, sweet-as-sugar
jaggery, and strewn with nuts, cardamoms, saffron and all kinds of wonderful,
mouth-watering things. Mohan ate and ate bowl after bowl of this dessert, till
he was ready to burst.
Then the two friends chatted and rested, till it was time for Mohan to head
back home. When he reached his house, he told his wife about the

scrumptious meal, particularly the payasam he had eaten. Oh, how Basanti
sighed and longed to have tasted this dish too! Seeing her face Mohan
suggested, ‘See, I have earned plenty of money by selling the fruits. Why
don’t I buy the things required to make payasam, which you can cook and
both of us will enjoy it together?’
Basanti thought this was a wonderful idea. But first Mohan needed to go to
the forest to collect some firewood. Then he could go to the shop and get all
that was required to make the dessert. So off Mohan went, swinging his axe
and whistling a tune. Now who would be sitting dozing under a tree in the
forest but a big black bear. He had just had some nice berries for lunch and
was enjoying his snooze, when Mohan walked by. First the bear opened one
eye, then another, and watched as Mohan cut a few branches of a nearby tree
and collected twigs for firewood. Just as Mohan was tying it all up in a neat
bundle, the bear spoke up.
‘Hi there, friend. Where are you off to in such a happy mood, and why are
you collecting so much firewood? Tell me, are you cooking a feast tonight?’
Mohan was astonished and a little scared to be addressed like this by a bear.
‘Y-yes, your honour, I mean, dear bear, ss-sir,’ he mumbled and stammered.
The bear was happy after his meal, so he decided to chat some more with
Mohan.
‘So tell me, what are you going to cook tonight?’ he asked, patting his
tummy.
‘P-p-payasam,’ answered Mohan.
‘Paya . . . what?’ The bear was puzzled.
‘Pa-ya-sam,’ Mohan said slowly. ‘It’s a sweet dish.’
‘Tell me more!’ The bear was intrigued.
So Mohan described payasam and how it was made. As he talked about
milk and rice and nuts and jaggery, the bear’s eyes started gleaming, his
stomach started rumbling, and he realized he absolutely, totally needed to
taste this wonderful human food.
‘Oh Mohan, my friend, do let me come and share your payasam tonight,’
the bear begged.
Mohan was astonished. A bear as a guest for dinner! Who knows how
much he would eat! But neither could he say no—that seemed so rude, and
the bear was looking at him hopefully.
He sighed and replied, ‘All right. You can come. But to cook so much
payasam I will need much more firewood. Can you bring that with you?’

Cunning Mohan thought he would make the bear do his work for him, so
he would not need to come to the forest for the next few days.
‘Yes, yes!’ The bear jumped up. ‘Just tell me how much firewood you need.
Ten? Twenty? Thirty bundles?’
‘Umm, fifty would be enough,’ decided Mohan. Then he slung his bundle
of firewood over his shoulder and went back home. On the way he bought lots
of milk, rice and everything else they would need to make the payasam.
When he reached home he told Basanti about the unusual guest who would
come to share their dessert. So Basanti cooked a huge quantity of payasam.
She added lovely nuts, aromatic saffron, sweet cardamoms and many
wonderful things into it as she cooked. Oh, how marvellous the payasam
smelt. Unable to wait any longer, the two started eating helping after helping
of the dish, without waiting for their guest to turn up. They ate and ate and
ate, till they realized they had eaten up everything! There was not a grain of
rice, nor half a nut left for him!
They sat around wondering what to do. What would they say to the bear
when he came expecting to eat payasam? Then, a devious plan entered
Mohan’s head. What if they made payasam with all kinds of other
ingredients? After all, it was only a bear, and he had never tasted this dish
earlier, so how would he know what it really tasted like?
The cunning man and his wife then took a little bit of milk, added lots of
water to it, threw in a handful of rice, and instead of jaggery and nuts and
spices they added pebbles and sand and cardamom husks and stirred and
stirred the mixture till it looked somewhat like payasam. They placed the
brass pot filled with this in front of the house and went and hid in the bushes
somewhere at the back.
As soon as night fell, a huge dark figure appeared down the road. On its
back it carried fifty bundles of firewood. It was the bear, come to dinner!
He reached Mohan’s house and looked around. There was no one. Then,
right in front of the house, he spotted the pot full of payasam. Unable to wait
any longer, he flung down the bundles he had carried and fell upon the
payasam. Only after he had eaten more than half the potful did he realize
something was wrong. The milk was watery, the rice was half cooked and
there was horrible grit and pebbles between his teeth! Ugh!
Oh, how angry he was now! Furious, he shouted out for Mohan. But
Mohan was cowering behind the bushes and did not reply. Now angrier than
ever, the bear spotted the mango tree and rubbed his back against it. The

mangoes came raining down, he shook the tree so hard. The bear continued to
stamp and shake the tree, till it fell with a huge crash right on to the banana
field and crushed the best banana plants. Seeing the firewood he had carried
all the way from the forest lying around, the bear started throwing them
around. One fell into the oven in the kitchen and set fire to the house. Soon
Mohan and Basanti’s house was in flames, his field in ruins and his prized
mango tree destroyed.
Finally satisfied that he had taken his revenge the bear stormed back into
the forest. When Mohan and his wife crawled out of their hiding place and
came back home they saw everything was in ruins. How they wailed and wept
and wished they hadn’t been so greedy and left the bear his share of payasam.

But what was the use of lamenting now? The damage was done, and the
greedy couple had learnt what I told you earlier—never anger a bear! And if
you make a promise to one, keep it!

Fire on the Beard

What a grand picnic everyone had! They played and ate and splashed in the
water till late evening. Ajja and Ajji had to drag them back home. That night
the children tumbled into bed and were fast asleep even before Ajji switched
off the lights. Quietly she tucked them in. The next morning there was no sign
of anyone waking up. Ajja and Ajji went about their work, not waking the
children. But when it was ten o’clock, Ajji decided they had to wake up now.
So she came into the room and found all four were up and chatting in bed.
She looked at them for a while with her hands on the hips. Then she said, ‘So,
I think you’ve had enough rest. Now up all of you. Wash up and get ready. I’ll
give you your lunch by noon.’
All the others jumped up except Anand. He grinned at Ajji and said, ‘You
know, I can live without food if I get to lie in bed all day.’
‘Really?’ Ajji said. ‘So be it. Everyone else, lunch will be ready at twelve,
so be there on time. Oh, and those who lie around in bed will also miss the
afternoon story.’ Then she walked off trying to hide a smile. Anand and miss a
meal! He was the one who loved his food the most!
Anand was quiet. The rest sprang out of their beds and went to brush their
teeth and have a bath. Soon the aroma of onion dosa wafted through the
house. It was too delicious to resist. Everyone gathered in the kitchen to help
grind the dosa batter.
By now Anand was bored and hungry, lying alone in bed. He quietly went
and took his bath. He was worried—what if Ajji had taken him seriously and
not kept a share of the dosa for him? And what if he had to miss that day’s

story? When Ajji saw him appear at the kitchen and join in, she laughed and
said, ‘You have become like Brij.’
‘Who is Brij, Ajji?’
So Ajji started the story while the children ate the dosas.

Yaaawwnnn! Brij stretched out in the sun, yawned loud and long, and went
back to sleep. Is Brij a rich man on a holiday; or has he worked hard all day
and just resting for a while? Neither! Brij was the laziest, most good-fornothing fellow you’ll ever meet. He would spend entire days just lying around
on his bed doing nothing. He was too lazy to even trim his beard and it had
grown right down to his knees. All day he sat around combing it and admiring
it, doing nothing else. His mother would call him, his wife would scold him,
but Brij was not one to mend his ways.
This is how most conversations with his wife, Shanti, would go:
‘Can you get some water from the well? There is no water in the house.’
‘The well is dry. There’s no water there.’
‘Can you fetch water from the pond, at least?’
‘The pond is too far. I can’t walk so much for a pot of water.’
‘Then pluck those coconuts from the tree.’
‘Oh, those coconuts are still tender. Let’s pluck them next month.’
‘What about getting some areca nuts from the tree then?’
‘Don’t you know, areca nuts are not good for health?’
‘Help me plough the field then.’
‘It is too hot. The sun will burn my skin. It’s better if you too did not go
there.’
‘Can you at least look after the house when I am in the field?’
‘There is nothing to look after in the house.’
And so on and on Brij would make excuses for not doing any work that
was asked of him. Of course he was never too tired to eat! As soon as his wife
would lay out the meal, he would jump out of bed saying, ‘Oh you have
prepared food for me with such love, it is my duty to eat it.’ And then he
would gobble down all that was given.
When evening fell, Brij would roll out of bed, comb his hair and beard and
set off to meet his gang of friends. Seeing how he managed to get out of doing
any work, many others in the village had decided to do the same. All these
people had formed a club, The Idlers’ Club. They would meet every evening

and sit around and talk about all kinds of things. They claimed this way they
were improving their general knowledge, but all they were really doing was
gossip and boast.
Brij, as the leader of the club, would get to boast the loudest and longest.
One day, the topic was who was the laziest of all.
‘Bathing every day is such a waste of time and precious water. I take a bath
once in two days. That way I even save water!’ said Manoj, the
environmentalist.
‘I never make my bed,’ boasted Suresh, the innkeeper. ‘Why bother when
you have to lie down in it once again at the end of the day?’
‘I eat my food out of the vessel in which it is cooked,’ claimed Raju, the
cook. ‘Putting the food in the plate only increases the work for you will need
to wash it too.’
Now Brij thought he should say something that would beat all these other
tall tales. So he said, ‘I am always cool and calm. Why, even if my beard were
to catch fire I would start digging a well at that time, and never store water
close at hand!’
As these discussions were happening, a real fire broke out in the village! It
burned down buildings and roofs and sheds, crackling and throwing up
sparks, making villagers run helter-skelter looking for water to douse the
flames.
The Idlers’ Club heard all the commotion but no one bothered to step out to
see what was happening. ‘What is going on?’ they only asked each other.
‘Oh nothing,’ Brij dismissed the topic. ‘Must be some circus or the other.
So, what were we talking about?’
By now the fire had spread to their road. It was fast making its way to the
house where the idlers were sitting. It got hotter and hotter. Brij’s friends
started sweating and getting nervous now. Soon the roof of the house caught
fire. Still Brij kept saying, ‘Don’t worry, don’t worry. It will rain now and put
this out.’ Then ‘The wind is blowing in the opposite direction and will blow it
down. We are really cool people, we should not be afraid of a fire!’
Finally his friends could stand it no longer and rushed screaming out of the
house. But Brij was too stubborn, and refused to move. Finally the fire caught
up with him and his beard started getting singed. Now even Brij was scared.
‘Heellp!’ he shouted.
‘Now you can start digging the well,’ his friends suggested.
‘Oh, get me some water from the pond,’ Brij begged.

‘That’s too far away,’ the others shouted from outside. ‘Maybe it will rain,’
they added.
By now the beard was burning away merrily, and all Brij could do was leap
and dance away from the flames. Till suddenly there were splashes and
splashes of water! Someone was emptying cool, cool water on the fire and
putting it out!

Brij could not believe his luck. Who had saved him? Why, it was Shanti
and many other women of the village who had worked hard and drawn water
from wells and ponds to save their homes.
Finally Brij learnt his lesson. Being lazy and pretending to be cool had
certainly not helped him in his hour of need. So he shaved off his half-burnt
beard, woke up early each morning and did all that Shanti told him to do, and
more!

The Way You Look at It

On a sleepy afternoon, while the sun continued to shine, the clouds opened up
and it started to rain. Sharan had fallen asleep after eating at least fifteen
pooris for lunch. When he woke up, he saw a rainbow in the sky. There was a
mild drizzle and the bright sunshine of summer. In the sky was a bold, bright,
clear rainbow. Sharan ran to Ajji’s house and started calling out to his friends.
Suma and Krishna were playing in the garden. Raghu and Divya were
reading. Anand was sleeping. Sharan was so excited he called out to each one,
‘Ajja, Ajji, Suma, Krishna, Raghu, Anand, Divya, come and see this!’
Everyone rushed out to see what was up. The children gazed in amazement at
the rainbow. Living in the city, none of them ever got to see such a vast
expanse of the sky, unhindered by tall buildings. Ajja and Ajji were used to it
and went back to their work.
That evening, while having their milk, the children were talking about
rainbows. ‘The colours of the rainbow are known as VIBGYOR,’ said Raghu.
‘A rainbow is called Indra Dhanush in Sanskrit,’ said Suma.
‘It is known as Kamanabillu in Kannada—the bow of Lord Kamadeva,’
said Sharan’s mother.
‘In the olden days if the sun and rain came together, we used to say it is the
fox’s wedding and all of us have to go on the rainbow to reach the wedding,’
said Ajji.
‘Ultimately it is the same thing, seven colours that appear in the sky when
the sun’s rays are reflected by the rainwater,’ said Ajja. ‘It depends upon the
way you look at it.’

Ajji nodded. ‘The same thing appears different, depending on the way you
look at it, and today I can tell you a story about that.’ Immediately everyone
turned their attention from the sky to Ajji.

During one monsoon season, it rained and rained in Chitpur, a little village by
a mighty river. It rained so hard that the river swelled up. Huge waves lashed
against the riverbanks and carried away trees, houses and big chunks of earth.
The villagers were really scared and prayed hard for the rains to stop.
When finally the skies cleared, one by one people emerged from their
homes. One of them was Raju. He walked down to the riverside. There he
saw something that made him rub his eyes in disbelief. Why, a huge black
rock had appeared there out of nowhere! And what was more, the rock looked
exactly like the head of Ganesha, the god with the elephant head. Raju
immediately prostrated himself in front of the rock. ‘Ganesha not only heard
our prayers and made the rains go away, he has come himself to protect us!’
Raju shouted to no one in particular. ‘I must tell everyone about this!’ he
yelled and ran back to the village to shape the news.
Next came Chetan, the sculptor. He had spent so many days cooped up in
his house waiting for the rains to stop. Now he was glad to be out in the open,
and was thinking of his next piece of work. Suddenly he caught sight of the
new rock by the river. It was just the right colour, worn smooth with age and
river water. It was perfect for the scene he wanted to carve! Giving a whoop
of joy, he ran home to gather his carving tools.
Just as he turned the corner, a merchant came by on his horse. The animal
was thirsty and he stopped there for it to have a drink of water from the river.
He too spotted the stone. ‘What a big stone!’ he remarked. ‘And it is nice and
smooth and flat. Let me sit for a while on it and rest.’ After enjoying a nice
rest on the rock, the merchant decided he would tell his friends about it. They
were travelling together and all of them would be thrilled to be able to sit
there for some time, by the river.
He went off to find his friends.
Just then, Ajit, a soldier, came on his horse. He got down and washed his
face. While his horse was drinking water, he was looking around and the
same stone caught his attention. He was surprised and said to himself, ‘What
a huge stone on the riverbed! Maybe I should get it removed so that in an
emergency it should not become a hindrance on the road. Our army can

march better if such obstacles are not there. I must inform my commander.’
Thinking so, he rushed back to his camp to talk to his commander.
Later in the day Bholu, the village washerman, appeared by the river with
his big bundle of clothes. To his astonishment, he found a crowd right around
his favourite washing spot. They were all arguing over a rock! Pushing his
way into the crowd, Bholu spoke in a loud voice, ‘Hey! What do you think
you all are doing?’

Raju now burst out, ‘This rock is a sign from Lord Ganesha, I want to
worship it.’
Chetan raised his voice even louder and said, ‘No no, this rock is going to
be used for my next sculpture.’
The merchant shouted, ‘I have invited all my friends to rest on it! It is
ours!’
Ajit was giving orders to his soldiers to remove the stone.
Bholu now grinned and said, ‘But this rock has been here for years and
years! Earlier half of it was submerged in the mud. Now with the rains the
mud has got washed off, and you are seeing more of it. The washermen of
Chitpur have been using this rock to do our washing for many, many years!
There’s nothing miraculous about it. Now off with all of you, I have work to
do.’
So saying Bholu emptied his bundle of clothes and set to work. What could
the others do? They had to go away grumbling quietly to themselves.

Roopa’s Great Escape

Ajja’s and Vishnu Kaka’s houses were teeming with people! There was a
village festival, and friends and relatives from near and far had come to
Shiggaon. There were people the children had not seen or even heard about
before. Some said, ‘I am your father’s fourth cousin.’ Someone else said, ‘I
am your grandmother’s second cousin.’ The houses were full and there was a
lot of fun and laughter everywhere. Nobody expected a separate bedroom or a
special dish at the dining table. They all ate together and talked to everybody
and slept on the floor on mattresses. The city children were surprised at the
ease with which the guests made themselves at home. The women helped out
in the kitchen in the morning and in the evening they dressed in shining silk
sarees and went to the fair. In fact everyone dressed in their best, put the two
hundred rupees Ajja gave in their pockets and purses and made for the fair.
The fair itself was quite astonishing. The children from Mumbai said, ‘It is
just like Chowpati on Juhu beach.’ The Delhi kids said, ‘It is similar to
Janpath.’ Others said, ‘It is like Karaga or Kallekai Parishe in Bangalore.’
Vishnu Kaka explained, ‘In every village there is a village god or goddess and
once a year we worship them in a grand way. At the festival and fair it is not
just about selling and buying, it is also about meeting people, exchanging
gifts, having a feast and a good time.’
The group moved from shop to shop, peeping into the photo studios,
examining bangles, waiting for a turn on the merry-go-round and clapping
along to the dances, when someone noticed Suma was missing! Somewhere
in the crowd she had got separated from the rest, and now there was no sign

of her. Immediately her mother started wailing, and Ajji consoled her. Vishnu
Kaka too looked really worried. The children were scared and thrilled too.
This was just like Home Alone! As Vishnu Kaka was about to make his way
to the police assistance booth, they heard Suma’s voice on the mike! ‘I am at
the police station, Vishnu Ajja please come and fetch me.’ When Suma had
been traced, her mother started scolding her. But Suma was not bothered. ‘I
was not worried,’ she said. ‘In the crowd when I realized I was not with you
people, I straightaway went to the police station and told them to make an
announcement.’
Everyone declared she was a very brave and sensible girl, and for a change
that day Vishnu Kaka said, ‘Today I will tell a story about a young girl like
Suma who had a lot of courage. I read this story in a book when I was young.’

Once, there lived a very clever young girl called Roopa. She was an orphan
and had been taken care of all her life by the people of the village in which
she lived. She was very hard-working and once she became old enough, she
lived all by herself and looked after herself. But she always missed having a
family of her own, even though her neighbours were such loving and caring
people.
One day, when Roopa was about sixteen years old, she went down to the
river along with some other women and girls to wash clothes and fetch water.
Diwali was around the corner and everyone was excited. They were
discussing what new clothes they would get. Some were expecting their
husbands and fathers to return to the village with lovely gifts for them and
were looking forward to all the merrymaking that would happen over the next
few days.
Only Roopa was quiet. She did not have anyone to buy her new clothes or
shoes or presents. The villagers were kind to her, but they had barely enough
for their own needs so how could she expect them to get anything for her? Yet
today, hearing all the happy chatter around her, she could not keep quiet any
longer.
‘Even I will get a new sari this year!’ she told Rama, her best friend.
Rama and all the other girls were astonished. Who was going to get Roopa
her new sari? ‘I heard from a distant uncle the other day. He was working for
many years in a faraway city and did not know that my parents had died. Now
that he is back, he has promised to visit me on Diwali. I am sure he will bring

some marvellous gift for me!’ Roopa had started weaving a story, and now
she kept adding, telling all kinds of tales about her imaginary uncle. Her
friends listened open-mouthed. Then they went home, telling each other what
luck Roopa was finally no longer all alone in the world.
As soon as the bunch of women had gone away, who emerged from behind
a tree, but Bholu the trickster. He had been sitting under the tree, planning his
next theft, when he had fallen asleep. Then he had woken up and seen the
women at the river and had sat there still hoping to hear something about the
villagers. Sure enough, he had heard Roopa’s story, and was now ready with a
plan!
Bholu decided to dress up as an old man and appear at Roopa’s house a few
days before Diwali pretending to be her uncle! Then he would take her away
along with any valuables she may have got from her parents.
A week before Diwali, an old stranger appeared at Roopa’s door. He was
carrying new clothes, sweets and other gifts. Roopa was out doing some
errands so her neighbours came around to find out who he was. Bholu acted
perfectly like Roopa’s long-lost uncle, eagerly waiting to meet her. When
Roopa returned home, she found everyone sitting around an old man, who
said he was the uncle she had made up a story about!
Roopa was astonished. How had this happened? She had only been
pretending to have a relative just so her friends would not feel sorry for her,
and now here he was, a real person! Then her neighbour, who had looked
after her all these years, said, ‘Roopa, this is your Uncle Bholu; he learnt he
had a niece and came here looking for you. He wants to take you home with
him and look after you like his own daughter. You are so lucky, Roopa, and
we are so happy for you!’
Roopa looked around at everyone, beaming happily at her, and thought
what harm would there be if she went away with this uncle. She happily
packed whatever little things she owned and waving goodbye to her friends
and neighbours, went off with Bholu.
No sooner had they reached his house than he took off his disguise and
appeared before her as a young man. Roopa was horrified. Oh, what a fool
she had been to believe his story and come away with him! He was nothing
but a trickster.
In Bholu’s house there was no one else but his mother, who was old and
deaf and blind. After eating his lunch, Bholu decided to walk about for a
while, meeting his friends and telling them how he had kidnapped Roopa. She

too ate her lunch, pretended she was very sleepy, yawned loudly and told his
mother, ‘Aunty, I am very tired after that long journey. I am going to bed for a
little while. If your son comes round tell him not to wake me up.’
Bholu’s mother nodded, though she had not heard much. Roopa quickly
went to the other room, borrowed some of Bholu’s clothes, wore them and ran
off. She took with her a few coins and a thick stick to defend herself if need
be. Before leaving, she arranged the pillows in such a way on the bed that in
the evening darkness it looked like someone was sleeping on the bed. Then
she covered the pillows with a dupatta and a sheet. If anyone only looked in
from the door it would seem as if a woman was sleeping on the bed.
Bholu returned home when it was well past evening. His mother told him
Roopa was in her room. He peeped in, saw someone sleeping and went away.
Many hours passed, Bholu kept checking whether Roopa was awake or not,
but each time he saw her sleeping without moving a muscle. Finally, he
realized something was wrong.
He went up to the bed now and pulled back the dupatta and the sheet.
Imagine his shock when he saw nothing but pillows on the bed! Roopa had
disappeared! He ran out immediately and asked everyone around if they had
seen a young, pretty girl walk out of his house. But no one had, because
Roopa had cleverly disguised herself as a man!
Meanwhile, Roopa too had walked many miles till she reached a different
town. There she looked around for work, and was taken in by an innkeeper to
look after the guests and to show them their rooms. Roopa, who now called
herself Rupesh, was happy doing this work. She could not return to her
village till she did something about Bholu, otherwise he would be sure to land
up there and bring her back with him, pretending to be her uncle.
After many days, Bholu turned up at the town. He walked from shop to inn
to market, asking if anyone had seen someone like Roopa. Of course no one
had. Roopa got to know and decided to teach him a lesson. When Bholu
reached her inn, he did not recognize her in men’s clothes. She agreed to give
him a room for the night. She told him, ‘Sir, I will give you a room in the
attic. It is nice and warm and cosy there, and you will be away from this harsh
winter cold.’
Bholu happily agreed and followed her to the room. A ladder was kept in
the middle of the room which went up to a little trapdoor. If you climbed
through the door, you entered the attic. Bholu quickly went up the ladder,
found his bed, wrapped his blanket around himself and went off to sleep.

When it was the middle of the night, Roopa sneaked into the room and
removed the ladder. Then she threw some marbles right under the trapdoor
and stamped loudly around the room. Bholu woke with a start. Who was that
walking around his room? He called down nervously, ‘W-who is there?’
Roopa called out in her man’s voice, ‘Nothing to worry sir. The soldiers are
looking for a thief they believe is hiding in this inn.’
Bholu was really scared. How did the soldiers know he was a thief and a
trickster? He was sure they were looking for him, and decided to make a run
for it. He opened the trapdoor and stepped down. But there was no ladder!
Bholu fell with a loud thud on to the floor! When he tried to get up, his feet
slipped on the many marbles strewn about the room and he went crashing and
sliding all over the place! Finally he hit his head against a wall and passed
out, unconscious.
Roopa had been watching this from the door with great delight. Her plan
was working! As soon as Bholu fainted, she heaved him up and packed him
up in a large box. She placed a nice silk cloth on top of him. Then she
dragged the box outside the inn and stood there.
Soon a bullock cart passed by with two travellers heading for the inn.
When they saw Roopa, or Rupesh, standing outside the inn, they asked, ‘Are
you the manager of this inn?’
Roopa nodded yes.
‘Why are you standing here then?’
Roopa replied in a worried voice, ‘I look after this inn. I was supposed to
go to my own village earlier today to attend a wedding. But there was so
much of work that I could not leave, and now here I am waiting for my cart
with this heavy box.’ Then she lowered her voice and whispered, ‘This box is
full of gifts I bought for the wedding, and if I don’t reach in time, everyone
will be really disappointed.’
The two travellers, who were up to no good themselves, looked at each
other. The same thought had come to both! They said, ‘Don’t worry, brother.
You can take a ride on our cart. Why don’t you put your box on the cart here?
But before we start, would you mind getting us a drink of water?’
Rupesh, or Roopa, smiled to herself, and dragged the box on to the cart.
Then she went inside to fetch the water. She took her time. As soon as her
back was turned, the two travellers opened the box to see what it contained.
They saw some lovely silk cloth on top. Now assured that they had got their
hands on some valuables, they quickly urged their bullocks forward and made

a dash for it. Once they were well and truly out of sight, Roopa grinned to
herself. Her plan had worked! She ran to the nearest police station, and told
them all about the theft.

The two men in the bullock cart were just celebrating their theft of the box,
when they were horrified to see soldiers waiting for them down the road.
What could they do, they wondered. They were crossing a bridge over a river
at that time, and quickly tipped the box into the water. Then they heaved a
sigh of relief and went their way.
So that was the end of Bholu, and Roopa too returned to her village, where
she lived happily on her own. She was not going to trust any stranger any
more!

‘And that’s what brave Suma did too! When she was in trouble she did not
talk to any stranger, but went straight to the police for help. We must always
remain cool like this when in trouble,’ signed off Vishnu Kaka. Suma was
delighted at this praise, and ate her bhajias with great happiness all the way
home!

Five Spoons of Salt

One morning, Ajji told Ajja, ‘Today is a Santhe (a village market day which
happens once in a week). Why don’t you take the children and show them the
Santhe and buy vegetables and other things for the house?’ Ajja, who
normally would have said yes, was hesitant. ‘How will I manage all the
children, that too at the Santhe? Remember what happened at the jatre—the
fair? At least there they had a temporary police assistance booth. There will
be nothing of the sort at the Santhe.’ Ajji agreed. This was a problem. Then
she had an idea. ‘Why don’t we ask Vishnu if he can spare Damu for a few
hours? Damu can accompany you and help see that the children are all right.’
Damu was Vishnu Kaka’s right-hand man. Everyone called him ‘Mr
Dependable’. He drove the car, cooked, looked after the fields, the accounts
and made sure Vishnu Kaka was well cared for. Without him, Vishnu Kaka
could not run the house or do anything in the fields. Vishnu Kaka’s son lived
with his family in Delhi and came only for holidays, so Damu was his real
companion.
So it was that all seven children and Damu and Ajja were now ready to
visit the Santhe. Damu had a plan. ‘The Santhe is only two kilometres away.
Why don’t we walk, and let your Ajja go in the auto?’ The children were
horrified. Walk for two kilometres in the heat! ‘It would be so boring too!’
added Raghu. But Damu had made up his mind. ‘Walk with me. I will tell you
such wonderful stories that you will forget everything, even the heat!’
The children agreed. Then Meenu had a condition. ‘It has to be a true story,
Damu Anna!’

Damu was unfazed. ‘I’ll tell you a story about my sister. Do you know how
I came to be “Mr Dependable”? I saw what happened to her once because she
was forgetful and decided never to let that happen to me.’
So he started his story.

‘Gita, where are you? I need you to run down to the store and get these
medicines for me!’ Gita’s grandfather called out for her. Where was Gita? She
was lying in bed, reading a book! For a long time she pretended not to have
heard what her grandfather was saying. The book was just too exciting, and it
was so hot outside, she really did not feel like stirring out of bed.
‘Gita!’ This time her mother’s voice also called out to her. With a sigh, the
girl got out of bed and went to see what needed to be done. Her grandfather
handed her some money and said, ‘I have a really bad headache since
morning. Will you get these medicines for me?’
Gita took the money and set off for the store. On the way she passed by a
sweet shop. Oh, what lovely gulab jamoons and laddoos and jalebis were
displayed! She had to have some. Forgetting all about her errand she entered
the shop and started tucking into sweets. Soon a friend came by and joined
her. The two girls ate and chatted for a really long time. Gita had forgotten all
about her poor grandfather with his headache! Afternoon turned to evening,
the medicine store shut for the day, when Gita remembered why she had
stepped out of her house. When she hurried back home, how upset her
grandfather was. ‘When will you grow up, Gita, and become responsible?’ he
sighed and asked.

Gita felt really bad, but did she mend her ways? No, she remained the same
forgetful person. When her mother told her to collect the clothes from the
washing line outside, she remembered to do so only the next morning! By
then, the clothes were soaked through all over again because of the overnight
rains. Another day, she had to take her sister’s lunchbox to the school. On the
way she saw a circus was in town. All morning Gita spent wandering around
the circus tents, watching the animals eating and training for their acts. It was
only when she felt hungry herself did she look down at the lunchbox in her
hand and realized her sister must have gone home by then, after spending a
day in school without her lunch.
Another time her father, while rushing to get ready for work, asked if she
could quickly iron his shirt. Gita picked up the shirt and placed it on the
ironing table next to the window. Just then the fruit vendor passed by with
big, fat, juicy mangoes in his basket! Of course Gita forgot all about the hot
iron sitting on the shirt and got engrossed in choosing the best mangoes to
buy. Only when smoke started billowing out and the shirt had burnt as crisp as
a toast did she look around and see what had happened. Her father was very
upset indeed that day.
Some days after this incident, Gita came home from school and announced
that the whole class was being taken for a picnic the next day. The teacher had
asked each student to bring one food item from home which would be shared
by all the children. Gita had chosen to bring sambar. She was very proud of
her mother’s tasty, tangy sambar and was eager to share it with her friends so
they could taste it too. Gita’s mother agreed to make a big pot of sambar for
her to take to the picnic the next day, and that night Gita went to bed feeling
very happy, dreaming about the exciting day ahead.
The next morning, her mother woke up early and started making the
sambar. She boiled the dal, added the vegetables, coconut and all the spices,
and set the pot boiling on the stove. Soon a delicious aroma wafted out from
the pot and tickled Gita’s nose as she lay sleeping in bed. Seeing her stir, her
mother told her, ‘Gita wake up now, dear. See the sambar is nearly done. I am
going to the temple, so after some time just add five teaspoons of salt to it.
Don’t forget now, and wake up and get ready quickly!’
So saying she bustled off. Gita’s grandmother, who was in the kitchen,
heard all this and muttered to herself, ‘When will my daughter-in-law learn
that Gita can never remember anything. I’m sure the girl will forget to add the

salt. Then she will be teased by all her friends. Better be careful.’ So saying
she went and added the salt in the pot.
Gita’s grandfather was sitting on the veranda reading his newspaper. He
remembered only too well the day he had spent with a headache waiting for
Gita to return with the medicines which never came. ‘Gita and remember
something? That’ll be the day!’ he muttered, and went into the kitchen and
added the salt in the sambar himself.
Gita’s sister was combing her hair, ready to go off to school. She too
recalled the day she had spent feeling hungry in school waiting for Gita to
turn up with her lunchbox. Sure that Gita would forget about the salt and be
laughed at by her friends, she quickly went into the kitchen and added five
spoons of salt.
Gita’s brother was brushing his teeth and hearing his mother’s words to his
sister, guessed she would forget about the salt. He dropped in a few spoons of
salt into the pot and went off.
Gita’s father was carefully ironing his own shirt. Like the others he too
slipped into the kitchen and added salt to the pot of sambar.
By now Gita had woken up and wonder of wonders, remembered she
needed to add the salt! So she too went and added five teaspoons as her
mother had told her to do. By now her mother had returned and quickly
poured the sambar into a big container and sent her daughter off for her
picnic.
At the picnic spot the children had a wonderful time, roaming around and
playing. Soon they were too hungry to do anything else. Out came the plates
and spoons and all the containers filled to the brim with food. Plates were
piled up with rice, chutneys, vegetables, pooris and all kinds of goodies.
Everyone took large helpings of the sambar as Gita served it out. But no
sooner than they put the first spoonful in their mouths, ‘Blaagh! Horrible!
Water!’ everybody started shouting. Astonished, Gita wondered what was
wrong, then gingerly tasted the rice and sambar on her own plate. It was
disgusting! It was as if her mother had dredged out all the salt in the sea and
added it to the sambar! Then Gita remembered, her mother had not added the
salt, she had! So what had gone wrong?
That day everyone in Gita’s house waited eagerly for her to get back from
school and tell them about her wonderful outing. But what was this? She
came trudging back, her face sad and tear-stained. What had happened? Gita
burst out at them, ‘Did anyone else add salt in the sambar?’

‘I did!’ said her grandmother.
‘I did too!’ said Grandfather.
‘So did I!’ said Father.
‘Me too!’ said her brother.
‘And I!’ said her sister.
They all looked at each other in dismay. No wonder Gita looked so sad.
Her friends would have made her feel miserable about the salty sambar!
‘Why did you all do it? Amma had told only me to do so!’ Gita wept.
‘Oh dear, you forget everything you are told to do, so we thought . . .
perhaps . . . you wouldn’t remember this time too,’ all of them said sadly.
Now her mother pulled her close, wiped away her tears and said, ‘See, all
this happened because no one could believe you could do anything without
being reminded many times about it. Promise you will be a careful,
responsible girl from now on, and we will all trust you to do your work.’
Gita sniffed and nodded her head. She did become much more careful with
her chores after that. And it took a lot of convincing, but her friends did come
to her house for lunch one day to taste her mother’s delicious cooking,
especially her tasty, tangy sambar, and everyone agreed it was the best sambar
they had ever eaten!

When the story was over, the children realized they were already at the
Santhe. There were heaps of vegetables, sweets, flowers all around. There
were goats, cows, buffaloes, fish, chicken and eggs for sale. The smell of
nuts, cardamom and other spices hung in the air. It was unlike the fair where
people had come to have a good time. Here a lot of business was taking place
and everyone was buying and selling busily. The fruits and vegetables were
very fresh. The flowers looked as if they had just been plucked. Everyone was
friendly.
The fruit vendor saw Ajja and said, ‘Namaste Masterji. Oh! You have come
with your grandchildren. It is nice to see everyone like this.’ Then he gave
each one a mango. When Ajja offered money, he wouldn’t take it. He said,
‘After all you were my masterji, my teacher. Can’t I give seven mangoes as
gifts to your grandchildren? They are from my garden, not that I purchased
them.’ The children were delighted at his warmth and kindness and returned
home very happy that day.

How the Seasons Got Their Share

It was an unusually hot afternoon, and there was a power cut. The children
were sitting in the house, wiping their foreheads and complaining. ‘How do
you stay without electricity, Ajja?’ asked Raghu. ‘In Mumbai, in our
apartment, if ever the electricity goes off, the generator comes on
automatically. We never even know that the power has gone.’ Ajja looked
around at the hot, sweaty faces, and said, ‘All right, I’ll show you a place
which is as cool as an AC room. And it stays that way without any electricity!
Come on everyone, grab a mat each and follow me.’
The children were intrigued. Ajja walked out into the garden, crossed it,
right till the old neem tree that stood in a corner. Ajja told them to spread their
mats under the tree and lie down. It was deliciously cool and comfortable
under the tree. Everyone lay down and looked up at the gently moving leaves
on the great branches over their heads. This was so much more fun than lying
in a closed room! Ajja too had pulled up a comfortable old easy chair and was
nodding off. After some time he said, ‘This is why I love summer! What
seasons do you children prefer?’
Immediately Anand said, ‘I too like summer, because there is no school,
and we can eat ice cream and mangoes. We can also go swimming.’
‘I don’t like summer, I like winter. You can wear colourful sweaters and eat
different kinds of fruits. It is nice and cosy to be at home. You can drink hot
soup and hot chocolate,’ said Krishna.
‘I don’t like winter, I get ear pain. I prefer the rainy season. It is so nice
when it rains and all the trees look so fresh and happy,’ said Meenu.

‘What about you, Raghu? Why are you silent?’ Ajja asked.
‘I like all the seasons, provided someone like you or Ajji is there with us.’
Ajja smiled. ‘Well, each season has its own beauty and use. We could not
do without even one.’
‘How is that?’ asked the children.
‘Okay, I will tell you a story about what happened once when the seasons
starting fighting with one another.’

God stepped back and looked happily at the Earth he had just created. He had
filled it with humans, animals, trees and seas and it looked a wonderful place
to be in. But something was missing. After thinking for a while, he called out
to six brothers: Day, Night, Summer, Winter, Monsoon and Wind. He
commanded the six brothers to go down to Earth and help the creatures there
live comfortably and prosper. ‘You must help the creatures on Earth grow
food and live comfortably. I have divided Time into two parts—twenty-four
hours and 365 days. You must share this among yourselves so that people on
Earth get all that they need.’ The six brothers nodded obediently, but no
sooner was God’s back turned than they all started quarrelling!
Everyone wanted a big share of the time available to spend on Earth. Day
and Night decided each would get twenty-four hours each. But the seasons
kept quarrelling. Summer was the eldest, so he said, ‘I will be on Earth for
365 days first!’

Rain said, ‘If I don’t show up all the water on Earth will disappear, so I will
come next.’
Winter said, ‘After the rains I help trees to flower, so I will come in the
third year.’
Poor Wind was the youngest and no one paid him any attention, so he got
the last year.
So life started on Earth. For twenty-four hours at a time there was Day,
then twenty-four hours of Night. Summer continued for one whole year.
While in the beginning the heat helped the crops to grow, soon it became too
hot for anyone to do anything. All the water dried up and there was great
discomfort. The people of Earth pleaded with Summer to stop and he had to
leave before his year was up.
Then it was the turn of Rain. When he started pouring down, how happy
everyone was to get some respite from the year’s summer. But soon the lakes,
ponds, rivers, oceans all filled to the brim and started overflowing. The crops
got spoilt in the rain and there was nothing for anyone to eat. When people
prayed for him to stop, he had to step aside and make way for Winter.
With relief people greeted Winter. Now there was neither the scorching sun
nor the pouring rain. But when day after day went by like this they started
falling sick from the constant cold, the plants started dying because of less
sunshine. At the people’s request Winter too had to stop.
Now it was the turn of Wind. Within a few days of his constant huffing and
puffing people were scared to step out anywhere. Trees were uprooted, the
roofs of houses went flying and there was chaos all around.
The brothers realized what they had done would displease God mightily. So
they decided to change their ways. Instead of each taking a year they decided
to share one year among each other. But again, Wind being the youngest got
left out and got no time for himself. He sat in a corner and sulked.
During summer time people sowed their crops and waited for the rains.
Rain came with loads of water but there was no wind to distribute it equally.
Some parts of Earth got buckets of rain and other parts none at all. Now
everyone realized that Wind was as important. They called out to him and he
finally agreed to do his work. But he did not get a separate time for himself.
He was allowed to blow all through the year. So in Summer he blew and
helped reduce the heat. During rains he blew the clouds from one place to
another and took rainwater everywhere. In Winter he still blew and made it
even colder!

Day and Night too learnt from the four brothers and decided to divide the
twenty-four hours equally. So one half was Day and the other was Night.
Now everyone on Earth was happy, and the six brothers learnt to share their
time.

By this time Ajji called from the house, ‘The electricity is back. You can
come inside now.’ But the children were happy to remain outside and enjoy
the breeze.

The Island of Statues

One day, early in the morning, the children heard a loud voice booming
outside. ‘Where are your grandchildren? I have come to take them to my
place.’ They went running out to see a very tall man with twinkling eyes and a
grey beard sipping coffee with their grandparents. He wore a crisp white dhoti
and shirt and a black cap. His smile was so charming that the children
instantly warmed to him. Ajji was shaking her head and saying, ‘Rehmat,
there’s no way Peerambhi can manage four children. Take them out for the
day, why do you want to have them over for the night?’ But the man called
Rehmat shook his head. ‘No no, I will take them for a night’s stay. My Usman
is a great cook and will look after everything. Peerambhi will not be troubled
at all.’
Ajji saw the questioning look on the children’s faces and explained, ‘This is
Rehmat. A long time back when your Ajja was a schoolteacher, he was your
Ajja’s student. He lives a little far away now. He has a mango grove there,
and a large house. All his children live abroad. In his house there’s a large
library of books and what can be called a mini zoo with goats, cows,
peacocks, pigeons and parrots. He wants to have you all over for the night.
I’m sure you’ll have a good time, but do you want to go?’
‘He also tells very beautiful stories,’ added Ajja.
Rehmat grinned and said, ‘Masterji, don’t exaggerate. I started reading
children’s storybooks only after my grandchildren were born. Then I
remembered the stories you used to tell us in school and passed off some of

them as my own.’ He turned to the children and said, ‘So what do you think,
kids, will you come with me? I will show you a different part of the village.’
Everyone was thinking, when Raghu spoke up, ‘Can we bring our friends
with us?’
‘Oh, you mean Vishnu Kaka’s grandchildren? Of course they can come.
The more the merrier. Peerambhi will love having so many children in the
house.’
Raghu ran to Sharan’s house to give the news.
Rehmat Chacha, as everyone called him, had brought a jeep and soon all
seven had packed a change and their toothbrushes and piled into it. Rehmat
Chacha’s house was far, about thirty kilometres away, and on the way they
had to go through a forest. The road cutting through the forest was narrow and
winding. Tall trees stood on both sides. It was a dark, scary place. Suma
looked around nervously and said, ‘Will anyone ever cut down these trees and
widen the road?’
Rehamt Chacha shook his head. ‘Oh no, the villagers will never allow it.
We love our trees and try to see as few are cut down as possible. Trees must
never be cut unnecessarily. Do you want to listen to a story about a kingdom
that cut down all its trees?’
Of course the children did, so Rehmat Chacha began his story.

Once there was a beautiful verdant green island. It had forests filled with huge
trees, waterfalls gushing with clear blue water and mountains where there was
a quarry of a unique kind of stone. This stone was valued for its attractive
white colour. It was also easy to turn into sculptures.
The island had been ruled for years by a king who was now old. He looked
after his people well and loved the natural beauty of his land above all. His
closest friend was a sculptor called Amar. Amar too loved the land more than
anything else. He had a school where students from far and wide came to
learn the art of creating sculptures out of stone. But Amar had one odd
condition for the students who studied in his school. He insisted they bring
their own supply of stone! Only for their final sculpture were they allowed to
use a piece of stone from the island’s quarry. Many grumbled at this rule.
After all, dragging tons of stone to an island in the middle of a sea was
difficult, but Amar was adamant.

Once his king asked him the reason for this condition, and this is what wise
old Amar had to say: ‘This stone and indeed everything on this remarkable
land of ours is a gift which we need to preserve. Unless we use it wisely how
will we be able to save this quarry for our children? If we start using the
stones and woods from trees without a thought they will soon finish and then
we will be left with an empty, barren land. This is why I insist that students
learning the craft of sculpting bring their own material, and only when they
make their final piece of art can they use this unique stone from our land.’
The king applauded this thought in his mind and let Amar run his school
the way he wanted. But then a day came when the king, now very old, died,
and his son took over the throne. Rajdip, the new king, wanted to do
everything differently from his father. He started changing many laws. One
day he remembered the art school and went to visit it. There he saw the
students working on their sculptures. But his ministers whispered to him the
complaints that other students, who had not wanted to bring their own
material, had made about Amar’s rule.
Rajdip realized that if he lifted the rule then many more people would come
to study in the school. Their fees would add to the prosperity of the island and
in addition they would create lovely works of art that could be used to
beautify the towns. He ordered Amar to step down as the teacher and brought
someone else to run the school.
Soon the island was full of students chipping away on the stone. Their
demands increased the mining at the quarry. They created large sculptures
which now needed to get transported back to the town. Trees were cut down
to make carts and to clear roads. Without trees to provide wood for their boats
the fishermen of the island could not go out to sea. They started fishing near
the land and got into fights frequently with one another. New houses were not
strong as both wood and stone were scarce. It was difficult for farmers to
make good ploughs and so farming suffered. All the mining created so much
of pollution that plants started dying out, diseases spread, and the tinkling
waterfalls fell silent as water became scarce. The climate changed, it became
hotter and drier. Soon there were famines and the once beautiful green island
was reduced to a wasteland of weeds and scrub.
Rajdip’s wishes of lining his capital city and palace with giant sculptures
was fulfilled. Each student in the art school made a beautiful huge statue and
gifted it to him. Soon these statues filled up the entire kingdom. Where once
there were deep forests and blue rivers and streams, the island was a barren

land now. The forests were gone. The rivers had turned into dirty trickles of
water. The climate had become hot and dusty as the rains no longer came on
time. People started leaving the island. The houses, schools and palaces
slowly fell silent as they were abandoned. With time, everyone forgot about
this island. Many, many years later when explorers landed here, they found
hundreds of statues strewn all over a bare island: a land destroyed by the
king’s greed.

How everyone enjoyed the story. The rest of the journey was spent in each
one acting out a part from the story, with Rehmat Chacha taking on the role of
the wise old king. Cheerful and at the same time very hungry, they soon
reached their new friend’s house.
It was a huge rambling place. Peerambhi was waiting for them at the
doorstep. She told Usman to make a sherbet of mango, and Shurukumbha (a
kind of kheer) for lunch. There was also paratha, biriyani, and all kinds of
mouth-watering dishes which Usman was more than happy to prepare. After
lunch they roamed around the house, examined the books in the library and
the many awards Rehmat Chacha had received for his innovative skills in
agriculture.

The Kingdom of Fools

‘Rehmat Chacha, you must be very intelligent. You know so much about
farming, fishing, stories and so many other things,’ Meenu remarked that
night as they sat outside, watching the fireflies twinkling all around them.
But Rehmat Chacha did not agree. ‘No, not really. There is plenty I still
don’t know. In fact, one can never stop learning. Knowledge is the only thing
it’s good to be greedy about.’
It was a beautiful, clear night. The moon and stars shone in the black,
unpolluted sky. Peerambhi was feeling very happy. Her own grandchildren
lived so far away, and came to visit her only once in two or three years. After
so long the house was filled with laughter and young voices. She was too frail
to do much, and was enjoying sitting among them and talking to them.
Soon they started yawning and rubbing their eyes. But no one was going to
bed till Rehmat Chacha told another story!

There once lived a king who was very intelligent. He looked down upon
anyone he thought was dull. He was also very proud about the fact that in his
kingdom there were no stupid people.
Some distance away from the capital city lived an old teacher. He had
taught the young prince, who was a sweet-natured boy once but had turned
into a proud, rude king. Many people told him about the king’s boastful
nature, and the teacher decided to teach his old pupil a lesson he would never
forget. He called his three best and brightest students, Harish, Mahesh and

Umesh, and said, ‘We need to bring that proud king down a peg or two. I
want the three of you to teach him a lesson and make him realize the
foolishness of his pride.’
The three students set off for the capital. Harish walked to the city market.
There he met a man selling betel leaves.
‘How much for these leaves?’ he asked.
‘Ten rupees for two hundred leaves,’ the shopkeeper replied.
‘Here are ten rupees. Give me only twenty-five leaves. My servant will
come and collect the balance one hundred and seventy-five leaves.’
The betel-leaf seller agreed and gave Harish twenty-five leaves.
Harish now strolled into another shop where beautiful shawls were being
sold.
‘How much for this?’ he asked, fingering the best shawl in the shop.
‘Two hundred rupees,’ answered the shopkeeper.
‘Here are twenty-five rupees. You can collect the remaining hundred and
seventy-five rupees from the paan shop there,’ Harish said, handing the
shopkeeper a note.
‘Please give the person who brings this note the remaining one hundred and
seventy-five,’ the note read. The shawl shop owner sent his servant with the
note to the paan shop to verify if indeed this was true. The other shopkeeper
glanced at the note and said, ‘Yes, it’s true. I have to give him one hundred
and seventy-five more. Come back in half an hour—I will count and keep
them ready.’
The servant returned and whispered to his master: indeed, the betel-leaf
seller was going to give them the remaining one hundred and seventy-five.
Harish walked out with the shawl. After half an hour, when the servant went
to collect the money, he found the shopkeeper busy counting out leaves.
‘Hundred seventy-three, hundred seventy-four, hundred seventy-five . . .
There you go, here are the rest of the leaves.’
The servant was amazed at being handed a sheaf of paan leaves instead of
money. He called his master and the two shopkeepers started arguing loudly.
Slowly they realized that someone had made fools of them. They rushed to
complain to the king.
The king was surprised to hear how a stranger had tricked the clever
shopkeepers of his kingdom. He decided to keep a lookout for this man.
The next day, Mahesh walked into the royal carpenter’s shop. It was the
middle of the afternoon and the carpenter was in his shop tinkering with some

strange-looking instruments. Mahesh was well dressed, so the carpenter
thought he was rich. Enthusiastically he started showing off his various
creations. He picked up a large wooden lock and said, ‘See this? Will you
believe that with this you can even lock a man? Place the person’s head
between the lock and a pillar and turn the key, and there, the man cannot
escape.’
Mahesh pretended to be sceptical. ‘Go on now. How can a simple wooden
lock do such a thing? I don’t believe you.’ The carpenter got very agitated.
‘But it’s true, sir. I am the king’s carpenter after all. I create many complicated
instruments for the state. Here, let me show you.’ Saying this, he put the lock
around his neck and the nearest pillar and turned the key. ‘Now, see? I cannot
even move my neck! Are you convinced? Now just turn the key the other way
to set me free.’
But Mahesh would not turn the key. He just stood there laughing. Then he
coolly picked up the key and walked out of the shop. The carpenter could
only shout at Mahesh’s retreating back. ‘You villain! Come back! Set me
free!’ But it was in vain. Mahesh had fooled him.
Later that evening the king came to know of this other stranger who had
duped his clever carpenter. He was worried. Who were these men, making the
brightest people of his kingdom look stupid? He decided to go around the city
in disguise to try and catch them.
As he walked near the city gates, he found a man sitting there with a heap
of mangoes, waiting for someone to buy them. The fruit seller had chosen the
loneliest spot, so the king was suspicious.
‘Why are you selling your fruits here?’ he asked.
The fruit seller was actually Umesh. He pretended to look nervously
around and answered in a whisper, ‘Sir, I have heard there are some clever
cheats roaming around the kingdom wanting to cheat us and our clever king. I
have heard one will be walking by this way soon, so I am waiting here hoping
to catch him and deliver him to the king.’
The king was surprised that this person knew all about the clever gang of
cheats.
‘Have you seen him before?’
‘Yes, sir. I know the gang. The person who is coming today is the chief.’
‘What does he look like?’
‘He is tall, hefty and very cruel.’
‘Is there any way I can see him?’ the king asked excitedly.

‘Sir, the best way is to hide. As soon as he comes, I will whistle, and you
can see him.’
But at that spot there was neither a tree nor any rock behind which the king
could hide. Then the fruit seller held out a sack. ‘Hide in this, sir,’ he
suggested. ‘I will keep you next to me, and anyone will think it is a sack of
mangoes.’

The king agreed and hopped into the sack. Quickly Umesh tied it and
walked away, laughing. The king soon realized he had been tricked. But he
was tied in the sack and could do nothing. Many hours later, when his soldiers
came looking for him, he managed to wriggle around in the sack and attract
their attention. How embarrassed he was, to be set free by them! He also
knew now that he and the people of his kingdom were not as clever as he
loved to boast. He realized his mistake.
The king’s old teacher came to the court and explained how his three
students had tricked everyone. Harish, Mahesh and Umesh apologized for
their actions. And the king promised to rule his kingdom with wisdom and
humility.

The Story of Silk

No sooner had the children gotten over their excitement of the visit to Rehmat
Chacha’s house than Ajji sprung another surprise. There was a wedding in the
village! Having attended some village weddings earlier, the children knew
what to expect. Here, it was not like the city where you went at a certain time
printed on the card, gave your present, ate and came back. In the village,
everyone was invited, whether your name was on a card or not. And not only
were you expected to come as early as possible, you were also expected to
pitch in and help the host! So Damu was seen rushing off in the jeep to pick
up guests from the railway station. Rehmat Chacha was in charge of
providing fresh vegetables from his farm. Ajji was herding a group of women
into the kitchen and telling them what to do. Ajja was supervising the
cleanliness and had stocked up on big bottles of phenyl and other cleansers.
And Vishnu Kaka was dressed in his best, most spotless dhoti and kurta and
was looking after the guests.
Ajji told the children to wear their nicest clothes and come to the venue.
Krishna, always careful of the way she looked, wore her pretty blue silk
frock. Ajji noticed and said, ‘Krishna, remember to be careful. There will be a
lot of people and food there. Don’t get your clothes dirty.’
Krishna promised to be careful. Soon Ajji disappeared into the kitchen
which was lined with people chopping and stirring and cooking. Outside,
guests were pouring in and Vishnu Kaka was making sure everyone was
served breakfast. Ajja was seen hurrying about with a bottle of phenyl in his
hand. Rehmat Chacha was taking care of the flower decorations while

Peerambhi Chachi was stringing piles of garlands. Children were playing all
over the place, film songs played on the mike and there was a happy chaos
everywhere.
After the wedding, during lunch time, while eating sweet pancakes of
chiroti with badam milk, someone jostled Krishna and a big puddle of milk
fell on her dress. She was grief-striken. Ajji consoled her. ‘Don’t cry. Silk can
be washed and made to look just like new. That is the wonderful thing about
it.’ Seeing Krishna’s tear-stained face she said, ‘Today when we go home I
will tell you the story of how silk was made for the first time.’ That made
Krishna happy. That night, though Ajji was tired, she still told the children the
story of silk.

Did you know that silk was discovered in China?
A long time ago, in a tiny village in China, there lived a poor girl belonging
to a weaver’s family. One day, the emperor was passing through the village
and saw her working in the fields. He noticed her red cheeks and rosebud-like
mouth, her proud bearing and her rough, work-worn hands, which meant she
worked very hard through the year. He immediately fell in love with her and
though he was much older, decided to marry her.
The girl married the ruler of the land and went to live in his palace as his
beloved queen. But she was unhappy. She had grown up in the wide open
spaces of the countryside, and now she was confined to a palace, magnificent
though it was. She was used to working from dawn to night without a
moment’s rest, but now she had many servants to take care of her needs and
did not know how to fill her time. In the village she had been surrounded by
family and friends who exchanged news and gossip as they worked, but in the
palace it was quiet and no one spoke out of turn. The emperor noticed his new
wife was sad and tried his best to make her happy. He bought her grand
clothes, jewels and artefacts, threw elaborate parties, hired the best musicians
of the land to amuse her. Yet she was sad.
One afternoon, the empress sat under a mulberry bush in her garden, lost in
her thoughts about her village. She slowly sipped hot water from a cup.
Staring up at the blue sky, the girl remembered the birds that flew over her
village. Then, sighing softly to herself, she picked up her cup to take another
sip. But what was this! A cocoon from the mulberry bush had dropped into
the hot water! Her first thought was to throw away the water and the cocoon.

But then she took a closer look, and she saw some threads peeping out from
the cocoon. Where had they come from? She pulled the threads. They were
thin, strong and shiny. She kept pulling and a long line of thread came out.
Now the empress had a great idea. She would take the thread from many
cocoons and weave soft, strong cloth from it!

She called her servants and everyone got to work. They took cocoons out
of the mulberry tree, dropped them in hot water, and removed the thread.
They gathered a fair amount of yarn. Then the queen ordered a special
weaving machine and wove the first piece of cloth using this new thread.
Thus silk, the best and brightest form of cloth, was weaved.
The manufacture of silk spread throughout China. It was the cloth that only
royalty could wear, and was much in demand in lands as far away as Rome.
The route through which silk was traded between China and Europe through
Asia was called the Silk Route.
Now that the Chinese had learnt how to make silk cloth, they did not want
to share this knowledge with anyone in the world. Generations of Chinese
royalty were sworn never to reveal the secret to anyone. When princesses got
married and went away to far-off lands, they were not allowed to tell anyone
in their new home how silk was made.
Many, many years later, when a clever princess was leaving her house on
getting married, as was the custom, her bags were searched carefully to check
that she did not carry anything that would help her make silk. This princess
had been weaving silk from a young age and wanted to continue to do so
wherever she went. She had hidden the cocoons in her long, elaborate hairdo.
No one thought of looking there! When she went to her husband’s house, she
took out these cocoons from her hair and started gathering silk thread! In this
way, legend goes, the knowledge of how to make silk left China.

When Yama Called

One day, Ajji was sitting and stitching a tear in an old sari. The children came
and sat around her. The holidays were finishing and they did not want to be
away from her for even a minute. Meenu and Krishna affectionately put their
arms around Ajji’s neck and said, ‘Ajji, why do you have so many wrinkles
on your hand?’
‘Because I am old,’ said Ajji.
‘Why do old people have wrinkles?’ asked Meenu.
Ajji took off her glasses, which she wore only when sewing or reading, and
said, ‘Once upon a time I was also young like you. My skin was smooth and
shiny. My hair was long and black. I had very sharp eyes and an excellent
memory. But as I grew older, everything changed slowly.’
‘We will all grow old like this one day, shan’t we?’ asked Divya.
‘Yes, every living being gets old. It is a part of life. Come, I will tell you a
story about old age.’

Many, many years ago, there lived, in a little town, a man named Arun. He
was a merchant and though not very rich, he lived comfortably enough. He
had a large family of brothers, sisters, wife and children. He looked after them
well, and in whatever way he could, he also helped out the poor people in the
town. He built rest houses for travellers, and in these there were dining halls
where anyone could come and have a good, wholesome meal for very little
money.

One day, while returning home from work, he happened to pass by one
such rest house. It had a veranda where people stopped and rested. Sitting
there, looking tired and hungry, was a stranger. He was a tall man. His clothes
were travel-stained and showed that he had come from afar. With him was his
horse, looking as tired and hungry as its master.
Seeing them, Arun’s kind heart melted, and he went up to speak to the man.
‘Where have you come from, my brother?’ he asked. ‘Why don’t you step
inside for a hot meal and some rest?’
The man looked up, gave a smile and said, ‘The rest house is very popular.
There is no room for me, and the dining hall is full too. I will wait here for a
while, then be on my way. I’m sure I will find another place to serve me some
food down the road.’
Arun would not hear of this. The thought that someone was going away
without food and rest was too much for him. He insisted on the man coming
back to his house with him. There he invited the traveller to share a meal with
his family. The man was served lovingly and ate his fill.
While he sat eating, the man noticed that Arun was sometimes a bit absentminded. It was as if something was on his mind, and he was worried. Once
they had finished eating and had washed up, the traveller rose to leave. He
thanked Arun for his kindness, then said, ‘If you don’t mind me asking, sir, I
could not help but notice that you were a bit worried. I know I am a stranger
to you, but perhaps it would help lighten your burden if you shared your
worries with me.’
But Arun only smiled and shook his head. He did not want to share his
thoughts with the stranger.
Then the man said, ‘Perhaps if I show you who I really am you will confide
in me.’
And in a trice the man changed. He was no longer a tired traveller, but a
god, resplendent in shimmering clothes with a crown on his head. His horse
changed into a buffalo, and the man introduced himself, ‘I am Yama, the lord
of death. Now will you tell me what’s wrong?’
Seeing this Arun nearly fainted. The lord of death had just shared a meal
with him! ‘Wh-what are you doing on earth, my lord?’ he gasped.
Yama smiled and said, ‘Oh, I like coming here once in a while, and seeing
what everyone is doing. So, what’s bothering you?’
Arun replied, ‘You see, I need to grow my business more, but today I was
not feeling very well. If anything happened to me, who would look after my

large family?’
Yama nodded seriously. ‘Don’t worry, child,’ he comforted. ‘I have seen
what a hard-working, kind- hearted person you are. You invited me home and
let me have a meal with you, knowing me only to be a tired and weary
traveller. I will do one thing. when it is time for you to leave the earth and
come with me, like all living things have to do one day, I will not come all of
a sudden. I will let you know many days in advance, so you can prepare
yourself and your affairs for the time you have to go away with me.’
Arun bowed to the lord in gratitude when he heard this and Yama vanished.
Years went by. Arun became an old man. His business had grown many
times over, his children and brothers and sisters were all well looked after. He
had few worries left.
One night, he went to bed and had a dream. He saw Yama standing in front
of him. Yama was holding out a hand towards him and saying, ‘Come, it is
time for you to go away with me.’
Arun was terrified. ‘But lord, you had promised you would tell me days in
advance before I would die. How can I come away right now?’
A small smile appeared on Yama’s lips. ‘But child, I did give you a
warning. I made your hair turn white, I made your back stoop with age, I
made your teeth fall out one by one. These were all indications that your time
on earth is coming to an end.’
‘But these things happen to every man and woman! How could these be a
warning only for me!’
Yama nodded, ‘Yes, they do happen to everyone. And when they do, men
and women should start getting ready to meet me. Life has to come to an end,
there is no escape.’

Arun now understood. He looked back on his days and realized that even
without meaning to, he had been preparing for this. His children looked after
his business, all his work was done. There was nothing stopping him from
going away with his old friend Yama.
He climbed on the buffalo behind Yama. ‘Let’s go,’ he said. And off Yama
went away with him.

The Unending Story

Today Ajja, Ajji and Vishnu Kaka were all feeling sad. The children’s
holidays were nearly over, and it was nearing the time when they would go
back to their homes. For three weeks the houses had echoed with their
laughter, games and quarrels. Now all would be quiet once again, till they
returned for the next holiday. The children too were feeling sad, and had
gathered around their grandparents in a tight little group. Raghu the eldest
said, ‘We had more fun this holiday then we’ve ever had. Even more than
when we visited Disneyland. And it was all because of the stories.’
Ajja said, ‘When I was still working as a schoolteacher, I always found it
was so much easier to get my students’ attention when I told the lessons in the
form of stories.’
Anand said, ‘I find it really boring to read history from a book. But if you
tell us the stories from history I’m sure we will remember everything!’
Everyone now turned their bright eyes on Ajji. ‘How can you tell us only
one story even on this last day, Ajji! We want more!’ they clamoured.
But Ajji shook her head. ‘If you eat only pickles and laddoos will you be
healthy? Stories are like that. You can’t spend all your time listening to
stories. Then it will be boring. Like the unending story that a king once had to
hear.’

‘I want a story! And that’s an order!’ shouted King Pratap Singh of
Mayanagar. King Pratap was only fifteen years old, and still a boy at heart. He

didn’t like being a king much, because he was supposed to be doing serious
things like keeping the law, listening to his people’s problems and all kinds of
dreary things like that. The only part he liked about being a ruler was that
everyone had to obey him! How he loved giving orders and making all kinds
of demands. And what he loved the most was listening to stories! Every day,
he insisted on listening to at least ten stories. All the storytellers in his
kingdom lined up at his court. They told him funny stories, scary stories,
magical stories and anything else that came to their mind. King Pratap
listened to all with rapt attention.
He loved stories and storytellers so much that whenever he heard a good
tale he would shower the teller with gold, silver and all kinds of wonderful
presents. His ministers sighed and shook their heads and tried to explain,
‘Your Majesty, stories are all very well, but you should be listening to them
after your work is done! Your people need you to do so many things for them.
If you spend all your time wrapped up in fantasies, how will the land
prosper?’
But King Pratap paid no attention. It was stories he wanted, and stories he
would get. But how long could the people provide him with stories? Soon the
tales began to dry out. Some tried to cleverly tell him ones they had related
long back, but Pratap was sharp as a needle. ‘I’ve heard that one! Off with his
head for repeating a story!’
Oh, how his ministers had to plead with him to pardon the culprits!
Finally, disgusted with all the storytellers in his land, the king announced,
‘I want someone to tell me a story that will go on and on, till I ask him to
stop. Anyone who can do this will get half my kingdom as a prize!’
His ministers were even more horrified at this. Half the kingdom to some
woolly-headed writer and teller of stories! How horrible! They all tried to
show the king the foolishness of his ways, but he was adamant. A story that
lasted for days, even weeks, was what he wanted and that was that!
Soon a long line of men and women appeared at his court. Each one wanted
to win the big prize. But none of their stories were good enough for King
Pratap.
‘Boring!’ he shouted at some.
‘Rubbish!’ he yelled at others.
‘Cock and bull!’ he bellowed at yet others.
Meanwhile work on the kingdom’s affairs had come to a stop. All the
ministers were sitting wringing their hands and wondering how to bring back

their king to solving all the important issues. Finally the chief minister, who
was wise and clever, had an idea.
The next day, a scruffy, crazy-looking man turned up at the court. His hair
was in a mess, his clothes were half torn and on his feet he wore torn shoes
from which his toes stuck out. He marched up to the palace and demanded to
be given an audience with the king. The guards sighed and let him in. They
were used to having all kinds of characters turning up at the gates wanting to
tell stories to the king.
The old man was admitted into the king’s chamber. There he made himself
comfortable, drank a huge jug of water, and without introducing himself,
started his story:
‘This story begins in a humble farmer’s field. The farmer had toiled days
and weeks and months and grown a bumper crop of sugar cane. He sold the
sugar cane to the nearby sugar factory and they made sacks and sacks of sugar
out of it. Everyone was so happy. All this sugar would be sold in the markets
and make everyone very rich! That year their children would get nice new
clothes, their stores would be full of food and their wives would be very
happy with them!
‘Now all that sugar had to be stored and kept carefully till the sacks could
be taken to the market to sell. The factory people poured the sugar into many
sacks and lugged them into a storeroom. In the storeroom who would you
find, but a colony of ants. They had decided that building their house near
such a ready supply of their favourite food was a very good idea, and were
always on the lookout for new batches of sugar to be stored there.
‘No sooner had the sacks been kept than the lines of ants marched up to
them. They found little holes to make their way in and the first ant went into
the first bag of sugar, took one sugar crystal and went back.
‘The next ant went into the bag and took a crystal and returned home.
‘Another went into the bag and took a crystal and returned home.
‘Yet another went into the bag and took a crystal and returned home . . .’
So on and on the storyteller droned. King Pratap found he had nearly dozed
off, the day had passed by and he was still listening to the same story.
‘Stop! Stop!’ he ordered. ‘I will listen to the rest of the story tomorrow.’
The next morning the old man turned up as usual and started from where he
had left off the previous day. ‘Yesterday I was telling you how the ants came
and picked up the sugar crystals. Now the next ant went towards the bag of

sugar and took a crystal and went back home. Another went and took a sugar
crystal and returned home. Another ant . . .’
The story went on and on like this. Lunch and dinner passed by but nothing
new happened. By now King Pratap was bursting with rage. How dare anyone
tell him such a boring story? ‘What kind of a story is this?’ he complained.
‘What will happen next? What happened to the farmer?’

But the old man only smiled and said, ‘Have patience, Your Majesty. That
year the yield was very good and there were thousands of bags of sugar. I
have to tell you how the ants collected all the sugar.’
‘Oh stop! Stop!’ Pratap shouted. ‘Stop this boring story at once!’
The man now stood up and said, ‘Fine, if you are ordering me to stop, I
have won the prize. Give me half your kingdom!’
The king was in a dilemma now. He had announced a competition and
prize no doubt, but could he honestly give away half the kingdom to this
crazy-looking storyteller with his boring tales?
As he sat pondering, the man grinned even wider, and took off his dirty
robe, rubbed off the dirt from his face and shook back his shaggy white hair.
Everyone was astonished. Why, this was the chief minister himself!
‘Don’t worry, Your Majesty,’ the minister told his overjoyed king. ‘I did not
want half your kingdom. I only wanted to show you how you were wrong to
neglect your work and listen to stories night and day. Your people deserve a
good king, someone who will work hard to look after them; someone who
will think of his own happiness only once his people are happy. That’s what
good kings do, you know. Not just giving orders and enjoying yourself.’
Poor Pratap looked ashamed at this. Yes, he had been an extremely selfish
king. From now on, story time was only at night, after all his work was done.

So that was how the summer holidays ended. Everyone packed their bags and
reached the station. Their mothers had come to take them back home. Ajja,
Ajji, Vishnu Kaka, Damu, Rehmat Chacha—everyone had come to see them
off. No one felt like leaving Ajji’s side and Meenu kept hugging her till she
had to board the train.
Soon the train puffed out of the station. The children leaned out to wave
their goodbyes. Slowly Shiggaon got left behind. But the children would
continue to remember their Ajja and Ajji and everyone else, and all the
stories, which would remain with them forever. And they would be back,
during the next summer holidays, when they would hear so many more . . .

THE BEGINNING
Let the conversation begin…
Follow the Penguin Twitter.com@PenguinIndia
Keep up-to-date with all our stories Youtube.com/PenguinIndia
Like ‘Penguin Books’ on Facebook.com/PenguinIndia
Find out more about the author and
discover more stories like this at Penguinbooksindia.com

PUFFIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd, 7th Floor, Infinity Tower C, DLF Cyber City,
Gurgaon 122 002, Haryana, India
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario,
M4P 2Y3, Canada
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd)
Penguin Group (Australia), 707 Collins Street, Melbourne, Victoria 3008, Australia
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, Auckland 0632, New Zealand
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, Block D, Rosebank Office Park,
181 Jan Smuts Avenue, Parktown North, Johannesburg 2193, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
First published in Puffin by Penguin Books India 2012
www.penguinbooksindia.com
Text copyright © Sudha Murty 2012
Illustration copyright © Priya Kuriyan 2015
Cover illustration by Priya Kuriyan
All rights reserved
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places and incidents are either the product of the author’s
imagination or are used fictitiously and any resemblance to any actual person, living or dead, events or
locales is entirely coincidental.
ISBN 978-0-143-33362-3
This digital edition published in 2015.
e-ISBN: 978-8-184-75603-6
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold,
hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior written consent in any form of binding or
cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition
being imposed on the subsequent purchaser and without limiting the rights under copyright reserved
above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the above-mentioned
publisher of this book.

